![](topbar.jpg)

[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| [The Intrinsics](builtins.htm) \>
IntrinsicClass  
[*Prev:* HTTPServer](httpsrv.htm)     [*Next:* Iterator](iter.htm)    

# IntrinsicClass

Each intrinsic class that a program uses is represented by an instance
of the intrinsic class IntrinsicClass. If you didn't major in college in
computer science, don't worry if contemplating the circularity of this
notion induces a slight spinning sensation; the IntrinsicClass intrinsic
class has only a couple of practical applications, which are pretty
straightforward.

Each time you use the intrinsic class statement to define an intrinsic
class, the compiler implicitly creates an instance of IntrinsicClass to
represent the intrinsic class. (Actually, *you* probably won't ever use
the intrinsic class statement; you'll probably just \#include system
header files that use it.) The compiler gives this instance the same
name as the class. For example, consider the following statement:

    intrinsic class BigNumber 'bignumber' { }

This defines an intrinsic class called BigNumber. It also creates an
object of intrinsic class IntrinsicClass, and calls the object
BigNumber.

## Using IntrinsicClass instances

IntrinsicClass objects exist simply to serve as identifiers for the
classes of the built-in object types, such as String, List, Vector,
LookupTable, and so on. There are two main situations where it's
important to have this kind of identifiers:

- with the ofKind() method
- with the getSuperclassList() method

## The ofKind() method

ofKind() returns true if the argument is the IntrinsicClass object
representing the intrinsic class of the first argument. For example:

    local x = new BigNumber('100');
      
    tadsSay(x.ofKind(BigNumber) ? 'yes' : 'no'); "; ";
    tadsSay(x.ofKind(Dictionary) ? 'yes' : 'no'); "\n";

This will display "yes; no", because the object is an instance of the
BigNumber intrinsic class, and is not an instance of the Dictionary
intrinsic class.

## The getSuperclassList() method

getSuperclassList() returns a list of the immediate superclasses of a
given object. If the object is an instance of an intrinsic class, the
list will have one element, which is the IntrinsicClass object
representing the intrinsic class. For example:

    x = new BigNumber('100');
    y = x.getSuperclassList();

The value of y will be \[BigNumber\].

Most intrinsic classes derive from an "abstract" intrinsic class called
Object, so, for example, BigNumber.getSuperclassList() will return
\[Object\]. Object itself has no superclass, so
Object.getSuperclassList() will return an empty list.

## IntrinsicClass methods

isIntrinsicClass(*val*)

Returns true if *val* is an IntrinsicClass object, nil if not.

This is a class method, so you call this method directly on
IntrinsicClass itself:

    if (IntrinsicClass.isIntrinsicClass(x))
      "x is an intrinsic class instance!\n";

At first glance, this method might seem redundant with ofKind() and
getSuperclassList(). It's not, though: those methods don't let you
determine if you're dealing with an IntrinsicClass object, because they
instead yield information about the *inheritance* structure for the
intrinsic types. IntrinsicClass is used only for the *representation* of
these objects, and isn't involved in the inheritance structure.

For example, \[1,2,3\].getSuperclassList() yields \[List\], and
List.getSuperclassList() yields \[Object\]. Since Object is the root
object, Object.getSuperclassList() yields an empty list. In order for
the type system to be internally consistent, ofKind() must report
information that's consistent with getSuperclassList(), so
List.ofKind(IntrinsicClass) must return nil: IntrinsicClass isn't
anywhere in List's superclass tree, so List must not be of kind
IntrinsicClass.

That's why isIntrinsicClass() is needed. It's occasionally useful to
know when you're dealing with an intrinsic class representation object,
and the normal means of class relationship testing don't work for this
test.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*TADS 3 System Manual*  
[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| [The Intrinsics](builtins.htm) \>
IntrinsicClass  
[*Prev:* HTTPServer](httpsrv.htm)     [*Next:* Iterator](iter.htm)    
