![](topbar.jpg)

[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| [The Intrinsics](builtins.htm) \>
Object  
[*Prev:* LookupTable](lookup.htm)     [*Next:* RexPattern](rexpat.htm)
   

# Object

Every object in a running program, including objects your program
defines via "object" and "class" definitions and instances of intrinsic
classes, ultimately derives from the intrinsic class Object.

You can never instantiate Object directly, since this is an "abstract"
class. However, since every object is a subclass of Object, every object
in the system inherits the methods defined by Object.

## Object methods

The Object class defines a number of methods. Since all objects are
subclasses of Object, all objects inherit these methods. Most of these
methods are related to the the relationships between objects and
classes.

getSuperclassList()

Returns a list containing the immediate superclasses of the object. The
list contains only the object's direct superclasses, which are the
superclasses that were explicitly listed in the object's declaration for
static objects, or the class used with the new operator for dynamic
objects. This function returns an empty list for an object with no
superclass. For an object with more than one direct superclass, the list
contains the superclasses in the same order in which they were specified
in the object's declaration.

For example, consider these definitions:

    class A: object;
    class B: object;
    class C: B;
    myObj: C, A;

The result of myObj.getSuperclassList() will be the list \[C, A\]. Note
that class B is not included in the list, because it is not a direct
superclass of myObj, but is a superclass only indirectly through class
C.

getPropList()

Returns a list of the properties directly defined by this object. Each
entry in the list is a property pointer value. The returned list
contains only properties directly defined by the object; inherited
properties are not included, but may be obtained by explicitly
traversing the superclass list and calling this method on each
superclass.

getPropParams(*prop*)

Returns information on the parameters taken by the given property or
method of this object. The return value is a list with three elements:

- \[1\] is the minimum number of arguments taken by the method;
- \[2\] is the number of additional optional arguments taken by the
  method;
- \[3\] is true if the method accepts any number of additional
  arguments, nil if not.

The second element gives the number of optional arguments; only
intrinsic methods will ever yield a non-zero value for this element,
because regular methods cannot specify optional arguments. For example,
the substring() method of the String intrinsic class can take either one
or two arguments, so its return list is \[1, 1, nil\], indicating that
the function takes a minimum of one argument, can take one additional
optional argument, but does not take an unlimited varying argument list
after those arguments.

If the third element is true, it indicates that the method was defined
with the "..." varying argument list notation.

If the specified property is not defined for the object, the method
returns \[0, 0, nil\], because it's valid to invoke the property with no
arguments in this case.

isClass()

Returns true if the object was declared as a "class", nil otherwise.

isTransient()

Returns true if the object is transient, nil otherwise. A transient
object is one that was created with new transient *classname*, or with a
class-specific method that creates transient instances (such as
TadsObject.createTransientInstance() or
TadsObject.createTransientInstanceOf()).

ofKind(*cls*)

Determines if the object is an instance of the class *cls*, or an
instance of any subclass of *cls*. Returns true if so, nil if not. This
method always returns true if *cls* is Object, since every object
ultimately derives from the Object intrinsic class.

propDefined(*prop*, *flags*?)

Determines if the object defines or inherits the property *prop* (a
property pointer value - specify this by applying an ampersand prefix
(&) to a property name), according to the *flags* value. If *flags* is
not specified, a default value of PropDefAny is used. The valid *flags*
values are:

- PropDefAny - the function returns true if the object defines or
  inherits the property.
- PropDefDirectly - the function returns true only if the object
  directly defines the property; if it inherits the property from a
  superclass, the function returns nil.
- PropDefInherits - the function returns true only if the object
  inherits the property from a superclass; if it defines the property
  directly, or doesn't define or inherit the property at all, the
  function returns nil.
- PropDefGetClass - the function returns the superclass object from
  which the property is inherited, or this object if the object defines
  the property directly. If the object doesn't define or inherit the
  property, the function returns nil.

propInherited(*prop*, *origTargetObj*, *definingObj*, *flags*?)

Determines if the object inherits the property *prop* (a property
pointer value). *origTargetObj* is the "original target object," which
is the object on which the method was originally invoked; that is, it's
the object on the left-hand side of the . operator in the expression
that originally invoked the method. *definingObj* is the "defining
object," which is the object defining the method which will be
inheriting the superclass implementation.

The return value depends on the value of the *flags* argument:

- PropDefAny - the function returns true if the object inherits the
  property, nil otherwise.
- PropDefGetClass - the function returns the class object from which the
  property is inherited, or nil if the property is not inherited.

This method is most useful for determining if the currently active
method will invoke an inherited version of the method if it uses the
inherited operator; this is done by passing targetprop for the *prop*
parameter, targetobj for the *origTargetObj* parameter, and definingobj
for the *definingObj* parameter. When a class is designed as a "mix in"
(which means that the class is designed to be used with multiple
inheritance as one of several base classes, and adds some isolated
functionality that is "mixed" with the functionality of the other base
classes), it sometimes useful to be able to check to see if the method
is inherited from any other base classes involved in multiple
inheritance. This method allows the caller to determine exactly what
inherited will do.

Note that the inheritance order is deterministic (i.e., it will always
be the same for a given situation), and that it depends on the full
class tree of the original target object. For example, suppose we have a
set of class definitions like this:

    class A: object  x() { "A.x\n"; inherited(); }
    class B: object  x() { "B.x\n"; inherited(); }

    class C: B, A    x() { "C.x\n"; inherited(); }

Now suppose we run some code like so:

    new B().x();
    new C().x();

The first line will simply display "B.x". B inherits directly from
TadsObject, so when B.x() calls inherited(), it will find no definition
of x() in any base class (since TadsObject doesn't define it), so
inherited() will do nothing.

The second line, however, will display this:

    C.x
    B.x
    A.x

So, even though the call to inherited() in B.x() went straight to
TadsObject when B.x() was invoked from the first line above, the same
call to inherited() in B.x() proceeds to A.x() when invoked from the
second line above. The difference is that C inherits from both B and A.
B is the first superclass, so the call to inherited() in C.x() proceeds
to B.x(). But C also inherits from A, and the superclass order is
defined so that A comes after B in C's superclass list. So, the call to
inherited() in B.x() proceeds to A.x() this time, since that's the next
superclass in inheritance order for the original target object.

propType(*prop*)

Returns the datatype of the given property of the given object, or nil
if the object does not define or inherit the property. This function
does not evaluate the property, but merely determines its type. The
return value is one of the TYPE_xxx values (see the
[reflection](reflect.htm) section for the list).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*TADS 3 System Manual*  
[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| [The Intrinsics](builtins.htm) \>
Object  
[*Prev:* LookupTable](lookup.htm)     [*Next:* RexPattern](rexpat.htm)
   
