::: topbar
![](topbar.jpg){border="0"}
:::

::: nav
[Table of Contents](toc.htm){.nav} \| [The
Intrinsics](builtins.htm){.nav} \> tads-net Function Set\
[[*Prev:* tads-io Function Set](tadsio.htm){.nav}     [*Next:* Network
Safety](netsec.htm){.nav}     ]{.navnp}
:::

::: main
# tads-net Function Set

The tads-net function set is part of the TADS networking package. These
functions provide access to certain network features.

To use these functions in your program, you must [#include
\<tadsnet.h\>]{.code} in your source files. You should also add the
library file [tadsnet.t]{.code} to your build, by adding it to the .t3m
file for your project. [tadsnet.t]{.code} defines some helper classes
that are used in conjunction with the networking functions.

## tads-net functions

[]{#connectWebUI}

[connectWebUI(*server*, *path*)]{.code}

::: fdef
Connect to the Web UI client. This sends connection information to the
Web browser client that launched the game, or displays a local Web
browser UI if the game was launched directly by the user from the
operating system desktop or command shell.

*server* is the [HTTPServer](httpsrv.htm) object that provides your
game\'s Web server interface. *path* is a string giving the local
resource path of the \"start\" page on your server. This is the fragment
of the URL string *after* the server name, starting with a slash \"/\"
character. (You don\'t have to include the \"http://server\" portion,
because the function automatically figures this portion based on the
HTTPServer\'s host address.)

Web UI games must call this function during program startup. This is the
crucial step that tells the client UI how to connect to the game\'s HTTP
server, so without this call, the client won\'t know the game\'s URL and
thus will never even attempt to connect. You should create the
HTTPServer object and call this function as soon as possible after your
program starts, since some clients might abort the connection attempt if
they don\'t get any information back within a timeout limit.
:::

[]{#getHostName}

[getHostName()]{.code}

::: fdef
Returns a string giving the default host name for the computer that\'s
running your program, or [nil]{.code} if the host name isn\'t available.
The main use of this name is for setting up a network server, such as an
[HTTPServer](httpsrv.htm) object, because it tells you the name to use
for binding the listener port of the server.

The host name is the name by which the machine is known on the network,
but it\'s not usually the real Internet address of the machine. It\'s
usually only valid within a \"local\" portion of the network, such as
within your house or business. This means you can\'t hand this name to
someone across the country and expect them to be able to use it to
connect to your computer. It\'s kind of like a person\'s first name: if
you walk up to a stranger and say \"Hi, I\'m Bob\", it won\'t give them
much of an idea of how to get in touch with you later. What the host
name *is* useful for is identifying the machine to itself. It might seem
a little strange that this would be necessary in the first place, but
there are reasons it\'s needed for certain operations, such as starting
a network server.

Some machines have multiple host names. When this is the case,
[getHostName()]{.code} returns the primary or default host name, if the
operating system has such a thing, otherwise it picks one arbitrarily.

Since this function is primarily for use in setting up servers, it\'s
sensitive to the network safety level setting for server features. If
the server level is 1 (local access only), the function returns
\'localhost\' regardless of the actual network host name. If the server
level is 2 (no access), the function returns nil.

Note that you should use [getLaunchHostAddr()]{.code} instead of this
function to establish the listening address for a TADS Web UI game.
[getLaunchHostAddr()]{.code} returns the specific host address that the
client used to launch the game, which allows you to distinguish local
stand-alone launches from client/server launches.
:::

[]{#getLaunchHostAddr}

[getLaunchHostAddr()]{.code}

::: fdef
Returns the host name that the client used to launch the program. This
is a string value giving the address of a network adapter adapter on the
local machine; it can be represented as a host name, or as an IP
address. In either case, the value is a string that can be passed as the
\"hostname\" parameter of the [HTTPServer](httpsrv.htm) constructor.

If the user launched the game in local stand-alone mode, this function
returns [nil]{.code}. This allows you to distinguish client/server Web
launches from local launches. In local mode, you should simply use
\'localhost\' ([nil]{.code} is equivalent) as the host name when
creating the HTTPServer object.

When a game uses the TADS Web UI to run as a client/server program, the
user runs a Web browser on one computer (the \"client\" machine), and
the TADS interpreter runs on a separate computer (the \"server\"
machine). In this mode, the user doesn\'t log on to the server machine
directly to launch the TADS interpreter. Instead, the user types the
server machine\'s address into her Web browser, and the browser connects
to an external Web server on the server machine. The Web server
recognizes this as a request to launch the TADS game, so the Web server
runs the interpreter. The Web server passes command-line information to
the interpreter, just as though the user had run the interpreter
manually. Part of the command-line information is the Web server\'s
external host address. The interpreter saves the address, and makes it
available to the TADS program via this function.

The launch address is important because it tells you the address that
the client used to contact the Web server. We know that the client used
this address to successfully reach the external Web server, so this is
the address we want to use to establish our own connection to the
client. Passing this address to the HTTPServer constructor accomplishes
this by making the HTTPServer\'s listener bind to this same address.
:::

[]{#getLocalIP}

[getLocalIP()]{.code}

::: fdef
Returns a string giving the default IP address for the computer that\'s
running your program, or [nil]{.code} if no address is available. The
returned address string is in the standard \'1.2.3.4\' decimal format.
The IP address is the low-level version of the host name; the host name
is actually just an alias for the IP address.

As with the host name, the local IP address is often only valid within a
local network, and isn\'t necessarily the global Internet address of the
machine.

Some computers have multiple IP addresses. An IP address isn\'t really
associated with the machine itself, but rather with a single network
adapter (the hardware card that physically plugs into the network). Some
machines have more than one adapter, in which case each adapter will
have its own separate IP address. On such machines,
[getLocalIP()]{.code} returns the primary or default address, if the
operating system defines such a thing; otherwise it arbitrarily returns
one of the machine\'s valid IP addresses.

As with [getHostName()]{.code}, this function is sensitive to the
network safety level setting for server features. If the server level is
1 (local access only), the function returns \'127.0.0.1\' (this is a
special IP address that always refers to the local machine - it\'s the
numerical equivalent of \'localhost\'). If the server level is 2 (no
access), the function returns nil.
:::

[]{#getNetEvent}

[getNetEvent(*timeout*?)]{.code}

::: fdef
Waits for and returns the next event from the network message queue.

*timeout* is the maximum time to wait, in milliseconds. If no events
occur before the timeout interval expires, the function returns a
timeout event (a NetTimeoutEvent object) at the end of the interval. If
this is omitted or nil, the wait is indefinite: the function won\'t
return until a network event occurs.

The return value is a [NetEvent](#NetEvent) object (or one of its
subclasses) describing the event.

Network events are generated by network server objects. For more
information, see the [HTTPServer](httpsrv.htm) object.
:::

[getNetStorageURL(*resource*)]{.code}

::: fdef
Returns an HTTP URL string for the given resource on the storage server.
*resource* is a string with a resource name (i.e., the name of a
\"page\" or file on the server.

The return value is a string with the full \"http://\" URL to the
specified storage server resource.

This function insulates the game from the details of the storage server
configuration, which can vary by game server. Using this function to
build the storage server URL, rather than coding the URL directly into
the game, ensures that the game will run on any game server.

See the [Web deployment](webui.htm#storageServer) chapter for more
information on how the storage server works.
:::

[]{#sendNetRequest}

[sendNetRequest(*id*, *url*, \...)]{.code}

::: fdef
Sends a network request. This allows the program to act as a network
client, sending requests across the network to remote servers.

This routine is sensitive to the [network safety](netsec.htm) settings
for client access.

*id* is your identifier for the request, which can be any value of any
type you choose. TADS doesn\'t use this value itself, but simply hangs
onto it for the duration of the request, and passes it back to you via
the [requestID]{.code} property of the [NetReplyEvent]{.code} object
posted to the network event queue when the request completes. This
allows you to relate the reply back to the corresponding request, so
that you can go back and finish what you were doing when you originally
posted the request. It\'s often convenient to create an object to
represent the request information; if you do, that object is the natural
identifier value for the request.

*url* is a string giving the URL of the request. This is a standard
Internet URL, which must start with a \"scheme\" name specifying the
protocol. Currently, the only protocol supported is HTTP, so the URL
string must start with either \"[http://]{.code}\" or
\"[https://]{.code}\".

Additional arguments depend on the protocol - see the individual
protocol descriptions below.

The function has no return value.

### How requests are processed

Network requests are sent asynchronously. That is,
[sendNetRequest()]{.code} initiates a request and then immediately
returns, allowing your program to continue running while the request is
processed in the background. While many requests take only a few
milliseconds to complete, some take much longer, so it\'s best to let
the program continue with other tasks while awaiting a reply. It\'s
especially important to continue handling user interface actions, so
that the program doesn\'t appear unresponsive to the user. When the
request is completed, TADS posts a [NetReplyEvent]{.code} object to the
network event queue with the results of the request. You read these
reply events using [getNetEvent()]{.code}.

Because the function just initiates the request and returns, it has no
way of knowing whether the request will be successful or not. This means
that the function can\'t return any status information. All results,
including errors, are returned to the program via the
[NetReplyEvent]{.code} that\'s posted when the request completes. If an
error occurs at the system or network transmission level (e.g., TADS is
unable to open a network connection to the remote server, or can\'t
start a background thread to process the request), the
[statusCode]{.code} property of the reply event will be a negative
number indicating what went wrong. Otherwise, [statusCode]{.code} will
be a positive number with the result status sent by the server.

### HTTP Requests

The argument list for an HTTP request looks like this:

[sendNetRequest(*id*, *url*, *verb*, *options*?, *headers*?, *body*?,
*bodyType*?)]{.code}

*verb* is a string giving the HTTP verb (also known as the method) for
the request. This is most commonly GET, POST, or PUT, but can be any
valid verb the server accepts.

*options* is an optional integer value giving a bitwise OR (\|)
combination of option flags to select special features. Pass 0 or
[nil]{.code}, or simply omit the argument, for the default behavior. The
option flags are:

-   [NetReqNoRedirect]{.code}: This tells the function not to follow
    HTTP redirects, but instead simply return (via the
    [NetReplyEvent]{.code} object) the raw redirect information sent
    back by the server. If this option isn\'t specified, the default is
    to automatically and transparently follow redirects, returning the
    final result from the final server after all redirections. In most
    cases, the default is preferable, since the client usually only
    cares about the actual result content, not where it came from.
    However, if you need full details on where the results are actually
    coming from, this option flag lets you override the transparent
    link-following behavior and obtain the full redirect information.
    Note that if there are multiple redirects before reaching the final
    page (that is, the resource at the original URL redirects to a
    second URL, which is itself redirected to a third URL, and so on),
    you\'ll have to follow the links one at a time, since the flag stops
    the process immediately at the first redirect.

    Note that automatic redirection only applies to HTTP-level
    redirects, via 301 result codes. There also exists a separate type
    of redirection via HTML [\<META\>]{.code} tags. TADS doesn\'t follow
    [\<META\>]{.code} redirects, regardless of the option flags, since
    it doesn\'t parse the content (HTML or otherwise) that the server
    returns.

*headers* is an optional string specifying any custom HTTP headers you
wish to include with the request. The function automatically generates
certain basic headers; any custom headers you specify are added to the
automatic headers. The *headers* string must be given in the standard
\"Name: Value\" format, with CR-LF ([\\r\\n]{.code}) sequences
separating headers. (It\'s okay if the overall string ends in CR-LF, but
this isn\'t required.) Omit this argument or pass [nil]{.code} if you
don\'t have any custom headers to send.

*body* is a string or [ByteArray](bytearr.htm) object containing the
content to send with the request. This only applies to certain verbs,
such as POST and PUT; most HTTP verbs send only headers with the
request, not a body. If a string is supplied, it will be sent as UTF-8
text; a ByteArray is sent as raw binary bytes. Omit this argument or
pass [nil]{.code} if you don\'t want to send any content with the
request.

If the verb is POST, *body* can alternatively be a LookupTable object
containing a set of form fields for an HTML-style form. Each key in the
table is a string giving the name of a field, and the corresponding
value is a string giving the value for that field. (On an HTML form, a
field is represented by an [\<INPUT\>]{.code} or [\<SELECT\>]{.code}
element.) The function encodes the lookup table into an
[application/x-www-form-urlencoded]{.code} content body for the request.

When posting form data, you can also include file uploads. These
correspond to [\<INPUT TYPE=FILE\>]{.code} elements in an HTML form. To
specify a file upload, use a [FileUpload]{.code} object as the value for
the field, instead of a simple string. You must populate the FileUpload
object with the following properties:

-   [contentType]{.code} = a string with the MIME type of the file
-   [filename]{.code} = a string with the client-side filename
-   [file]{.code} = a String or ByteArray containing the file to upload

If the [contentType]{.code} property is omitted, the default is
[\'text/plain;charset=utf-8\']{.code} if the [file]{.code} value is a
string, or [\'application/octet-stream\']{.code} if it\'s a ByteArray.
You shouldn\'t override the string default, since the string will be
sent as UTF-8 data in any case. You should override the default for a
ByteArray if you know the actual format of the data you\'re sending.

*bodyType* is a string giving the MIME type of the *body* data. If this
is omitted or [nil]{.code}, the function uses a default value that
depends on the *body* value\'s type:

-   If *body* is a string, [\'text/plain;charset=utf-8\']{.code}
-   If *body* is a ByteArray, [\'application/octet-stream\']{.code}
-   If *body* is a LookupTable,
    [\'application/x-www-form-urlencoded\']{.code} or
    [\'multipart/form\']{.code}, depending on whether any file uploads
    are included in the form data

When you know the specific format of ByteArray data that you\'re
sending, you should use *bodyType* to specify the format, since the
[octet-stream]{.code} type is a generic default that doesn\'t tell the
server anything about the object you\'re sending. For example, if
you\'re sending a JPEG image, you should specify
[\'image/jpeg\']{.code}.

You shouldn\'t override *bodyType* for strings, since the content is
actually sent as UTF-8 character data regardless of the MIME type you
specify here.

The *bodyType* value is ignored entirely if the *body* is a LookupTable,
since the function prepares the actual content data in this case and
thus determines the format itself.

Note that servers aren\'t obligated to respect the content type you
specify here (or for FileUpload objects), since they can\'t assume that
clients are trustworthy or that they actually know the correct content
type.
:::

[]{#NetEvent}

## The NetEvent class

The [getNetEvent()]{.code} function returns an object of class NetEvent
(or one of NetEvent\'s subclasses) describing the event. NetEvent is
defined in the library file [tadsnet.t]{.code}. You can determine the
type of the event by looking at the [evType]{.code} property of the
object:

-   [[NetEvRequest]{.code}]{#NetEvRequest} - this represents an incoming
    network request from a client. When the event type is
    [NetEvRequest]{.code}, the event object is of class
    **NetRequestEvent**, a subclass of NetEvent. The [evRequest]{.code}
    property of the object contains a separate object representing the
    client request. You can determine the specific type of request by
    inspecting the class of this object:
    -   For an HTTP request, the [evRequest]{.code} value is an object
        of intrinsic class [HTTPRequest](httpreq.htm).
-   [[NetEvReply]{.code}]{#NetEvReply} - this represents a reply to a
    network request made with
    [[sendNetRequest()]{.code}](#sendNetRequest). The event object for
    this event type is of class [NetReplyEvent]{.code}. This object
    tells you whether the request succeeded or failed, and if it
    succeeded, contains the reply information from the server. Some key
    properties:
    -   [requestID]{.code} contains the identifier value originally
        passed to [sendNetRequest()]{.code}, which lets you relate the
        reply back to the original request.
    -   [statusCode]{.code} indicates whether the request succeeded or
        failed. If this is a negative number, it means that the system
        was unable to send the network request at all, or that the
        request failed due to a networking error. If the status is a
        positive number, it\'s a result code from the server; for HTTP
        requests, this is an HTTP status code. HTTP codes in the 200
        range indicate success, and other ranges indicate errors.
    -   [replyBody]{.code} is the content body of an HTTP reply. This is
        a File object, open in read-only mode, containing the data of
        the reply. If the reply is textual, the file is open in text
        mode, otherwise it\'s open in raw mode.
    -   [replyHeaders]{.code} is a lookup table containing the HTTP
        headers of the reply. The table\'s keys are header names (all in
        lower-case), and the corresponding values are the header values,
        in string format. For example,
        [replyHeaders\[\'content-type\'\]]{.code} contains the
        Content-Type header value.
-   [[NetEvTimeout]{.code}]{#NetEvTimeout} - the timeout that you
    specified in the call to [getNetEvent()]{.code} expired before any
    network event occurred. When the event type is
    [NetEvTimeout]{.code}, the event object is of class
    **NetTimeoutEvent**.
-   [[NetEvDebugBreak]{.code}]{#NetEvDebugBreak} - the user manually
    broke into the debugger before any network event (or timeout)
    occurred. This event is possible only when the program is being run
    under the interactive debugger. The event interrupts the event wait
    to allow the debugger to pause the program at a byte-code
    instruction.
-   [[NetEvUIClose]{.code}]{#NetEvUIClose} - the user manually closed
    the Web UI window. This event is possible only when the program is
    running in a TADS interpreter where the Web UI is integrated with
    the interpreter, so that both pieces are running locally on the same
    computer. This configuration is available on some platforms to
    emulate the traditional TADS interpreter, where the game runs as a
    simple local application with its own UI window. The
    [NetEvUIClose]{.code} event occurs when the user closes this
    integrated application window. In this configuration, the point is
    to emulate an ordinary, local, stand-alone application, so closing
    the window is one way for the user to terminate the program. In most
    cases, then, the game should simply terminate when it receives this
    event, because that\'s almost certainly the user\'s intention.
    This event isn\'t applicable in client/server mode, where the user
    interface is running in a Web browser. In client/server mode, the
    server has no reliable way of knowing when a browser window is
    closed; all it knows for sure is whether the client has sent any
    network data recently. The standard TADS Web UI library
    automatically exchanges messages with the server periodically just
    to let it know that the window is still open, but failure to receive
    these periodic messages doesn\'t necessarily mean that the user has
    explicitly quit; it could indicate a temporary condition beyond the
    user\'s control, such as a network interruption. (Brief outages are
    common, due to traffic congestion and router hiccups, and usually
    clear up without any manual intervention within a few moments.) This
    is why the UI Close event isn\'t used in client/server mode.
    Instead, the standard TADS library monitors the connection for
    network activity, and assumes that the client has disconnected if a
    certain interval (a couple of minutes, in the library default
    settings) elapses without any contact. This allows for brief network
    interruptions without interfering with the game session; an
    interruption won\'t cause the server to disconnect as long as it
    doesn\'t last longer than the inactivity limit. If the user actually
    has closed the browser with the intention of quitting, though, there
    will be no more network activity, so the server will give up waiting
    and shut itself down after the time limit expires.
-   [[NetEvReplyDone]{.code}]{#NetEvReplyDone} - an asynchronous reply
    to a request (see
    [HTTPRequest.sendReplyAsync()](httpreq.htm#sendReplyAsync)) has
    completed. This event occurs when an asynchronous reply has been
    successfully completed or fails with an error (such as a broken
    network connection). When the event type is [NetEvReplyDone]{.code},
    the event object is of class **NetReplyDoneEvent**, which has the
    following properties and methods:
    -   [requestObj]{.code} - the original request object for which the
        reply was being sent (this is an [HTTPRequest](httpreq.htm)
        object in the case of an HTTP request)
    -   [isSuccessful()]{.code} - returns [true]{.code} if the reply was
        successfully completed, [nil]{.code} if it failed. There\'s not
        much that the server can do if an HTTP reply fails, since HTTP
        doesn\'t have a way for a server to initiate contact with a
        client. It\'s really up to the client to take any needed
        recovery action, such as retrying the request, so this error
        information is mostly advisory.
    -   [socketErr]{.code} - an integer giving the network error code
        that caused the reply to fail, if applicable; this is zero if
        there was no network error.
    -   [errMsg]{.code} - a string describing the error that caused the
        reply to fail, if applicable; this is [nil]{.code} if there was
        no error.
:::

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: navb
*TADS 3 System Manual*\
[Table of Contents](toc.htm){.nav} \| [The
Intrinsics](builtins.htm){.nav} \> tads-net Function Set\
[[*Prev:* tads-io Function Set](tadsio.htm){.nav}     [*Next:* Network
Safety](netsec.htm){.nav}     ]{.navnp}
:::
