docs/adv3lite/learning/1-introduction.md, before:

# 1. Introduction

## 1.1. The Aim and Purpose of this Book

The aim of this book is to enable people to learn TADS 3 from scratch, but to learn it in conjunction with adv3Lite rather than the adv3 library that comes standard with TADS 3. The reason you may want to do this is that adv3Lite is intended to be easier to learn and work with than adv3. But if you start out knowing little or nothing at all about TADS 3, then you need to pick up quite a bit about the TADS 3 *language* (and other aspects of the system) along with learning how to use a *library*. *Learning TADS 3* does this job for people who want to learn TADS 3 with the built-in adv3 Library;
 *Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite* aims to do the same job for people new to TADS 3 who'd rather learn it with adv3Lite.

Adv3Lite already comes with a Tutorial, called the *adv3Lite Tutorial*. While *Learning TADS 3* is still a tutorial, unlike the *adv3Lite Tutorial* it is not tied to taking the reader through the development of a few sample games, and is thus free to present the material in a more systematic manner. It should therefore suit readers who would prefer a more systematic treatment, or who don't feel they will learn much by copying the code for someone else's game. On the other hand the *Tutorial* may work better for readers who would like to be taken through the development of a complete game, or who would like more step-by-step guidance. If you're anxious to get on with developing your own IF masterpiece, *Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite* may be the better choice for you (and below I'll offer a couple of suggestions on how you might like to use it in tandem with developing your own game). If what you're after is a gentler walkthrough of adv3Lite's capabilities, then you may prefer the *Tutorial*.

*Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite *is intended as an *introduction* to both the TADS 3 language and the adv3Lite library;
 it is not intended to tell you everything there is to know about either, since most readers would probably find that overwhelming. The aim is rather to help beginners master the basics, to the point at which they can comfortably find out anything else they know from the *TADS 3 System Manual* and the *Adv3Lite Manual*. For that reason some details are deliberately left out to help the reader focus on the more basic essentials without being distracted into every nook, cranny and by-way. The penultimate chapter then gives a brief account of some of the other features of the system not covered in the book, to alert readers to some of the other things that TADS 3 and adv3Lite can do. It may be, then, that you won't immediately find the answer to how to implement the terribly clever idea you've come up with for your game. On the assumption that you're a beginner, I would urge you to put that terribly clever idea to one side until you are reasonably familiar with the basics set out in this book;
 you'll get where you want to go a lot quicker that way in the long run.

Becoming proficient at TADS 3 (and adv3Lite) is not a matter of committing everything you might possibly want to know about it to memory. The system is far too large for that. Becoming proficient at TADS 3 is a matter of learning (through practice) those parts of the system that you use most commonly, while at the same time learning to use the documentation effectively in order to look up the rest. Since effective use of the *TADS 3 System Manual*, the *Library Reference Manual* and the *Adv3Lite Manual* are essential skills for any adv3Lite author, readers of this book will be encouraged to look material up in these other documents from an early stage. There would, in any case, be little or no point in reproducing large amounts of information that are perfectly well covered elsewhere, and so from time to time readers are referred to these other manuals for further information. The aim is to present the basic information here and to leave readers to find out the less common details elsewhere. This should benefit readers in two ways: first, by helping them to become familiar with other documentation, and second, by allowing the explanations offered here to be kept relatively simple, concentrating on what is basic and central.

How readers choose to use this book is, of course, up to them. If anyone really wants to set it to music or translate it into epic Greek hexameters they are entirely welcome to do so! But perhaps I may be permitted to offer a suggestion. Some readers may find it helpful (perhaps after trying out an exercise or two from the first chapter) to read fairly rapidly through the whole book without stopping to do the exercises or to look up the suggested material in other manuals, and only then come back to work through this book more slowly and carefully second time round, trying out all the exercises and looking up all the other suggested material. This approach could have a number of benefits: by enabling you to satisfy your natural curiosity about what is coming next in the first read-through, it should help you to curb the urge to race through too quickly, skimping on the exercises and external cross-references, which you can follow up when you come to read through it second time round. It should also give you an initial overview so that when you come to read this book through more carefully second time round it will be with at least some idea of how the parts fit into the whole.

Again there's more than one way you can use the exercises. You can, if you wish, take them literally and try to implement exactly what they suggest. Or, if you're primarily anxious to get on with your own game, you could try to think of something in your own game that's analogous to the exercise being proposed and then go ahead and implement that, perhaps studying the source code of the sample game when one's suggested to get ideas for your own game. That way, you will be able to make progress with your own game while still following this manual in a reasonably systematic fashion. If you do try the exercises, you might like to know that suggested solutions to some of them are provided in the same directory as this book.

## 1.2. What You Need to Know Before You Start

It is assumed that anyone reading this book has a reasonable idea of what Interactive Fiction is, how it's played, and what its basic conventions are, otherwise they wouldn't be wanting to learn how to program in TADS 3. But you may need instructions on how to set up and compile a game in adv3Lite. You can find all the information you need on how to install and set up a TADS 3 development environment in the [quick start guide](../../../quickstart/quickstart.html) on the main page. (This replaces the instructions originally here in the PDF, because the information was out of date. --- ED)

Commit message:

Edit Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite a lot
fix code samples in first 4 chapters

docs/adv3lite/learning/1-introduction.md, after:

---
layout: article
title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../
styleType: article
---

# 1. Introduction

## 1.1. The Aim and Purpose of this Book

The aim of this book is to enable people to learn TADS 3 from scratch, but to learn it in conjunction with adv3Lite rather than the adv3 library that comes standard with TADS 3. The reason you may want to do this is that adv3Lite is intended to be easier to learn and work with than adv3. But if you start out knowing little or nothing at all about TADS 3, then you need to pick up quite a bit about the TADS 3 *language* (and other aspects of the system) along with learning how to use a *library*. *Learning TADS 3* does this job for people who want to learn TADS 3 with the built-in adv3 Library;
 *Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite* aims to do the same job for people new to TADS 3 who'd rather learn it with adv3Lite.

Adv3Lite already comes with a Tutorial, called the *adv3Lite Tutorial*. While *Learning TADS 3* is still a tutorial, unlike the *adv3Lite Tutorial* it is not tied to taking the reader through the development of a few sample games, and is thus free to present the material in a more systematic manner. It should therefore suit readers who would prefer a more systematic treatment, or who don't feel they will learn much by copying the code for someone else's game. On the other hand the *Tutorial* may work better for readers who would like to be taken through the development of a complete game, or who would like more step-by-step guidance. If you're anxious to get on with developing your own IF masterpiece, *Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite* may be the better choice for you (and below I'll offer a couple of suggestions on how you might like to use it in tandem with developing your own game). If what you're after is a gentler walkthrough of adv3Lite's capabilities, then you may prefer the *Tutorial*.

*Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite *is intended as an *introduction* to both the TADS 3 language and the adv3Lite library;
 it is not intended to tell you everything there is to know about either, since most readers would probably find that overwhelming. The aim is rather to help beginners master the basics, to the point at which they can comfortably find out anything else they know from the *TADS 3 System Manual* and the *Adv3Lite Manual*. For that reason some details are deliberately left out to help the reader focus on the more basic essentials without being distracted into every nook, cranny and by-way. The penultimate chapter then gives a brief account of some of the other features of the system not covered in the book, to alert readers to some of the other things that TADS 3 and adv3Lite can do. It may be, then, that you won't immediately find the answer to how to implement the terribly clever idea you've come up with for your game. On the assumption that you're a beginner, I would urge you to put that terribly clever idea to one side until you are reasonably familiar with the basics set out in this book;  you'll get where you want to go a lot quicker that way in the long run.

Becoming proficient at TADS 3 (and adv3Lite) is not a matter of committing everything you might possibly want to know about it to memory. The system is far too large for that. Becoming proficient at TADS 3 is a matter of learning (through practice) those parts of the system that you use most commonly, while at the same time learning to use the documentation effectively in order to look up the rest. Since effective use of the *TADS 3 System Manual*, the *Library Reference Manual* and the *Adv3Lite Manual* are essential skills for any adv3Lite author, readers of this book will be encouraged to look material up in these other documents from an early stage. There would, in any case, be little or no point in reproducing large amounts of information that are perfectly well covered elsewhere, and so from time to time readers are referred to these other manuals for further information. The aim is to present the basic information here and to leave readers to find out the less common details elsewhere. This should benefit readers in two ways: first, by helping them to become familiar with other documentation, and second, by allowing the explanations offered here to be kept relatively simple, concentrating on what is basic and central.

How readers choose to use this book is, of course, up to them. If anyone really wants to set it to music or translate it into epic Greek hexameters they are entirely welcome to do so! But perhaps I may be permitted to offer a suggestion. Some readers may find it helpful (perhaps after trying out an exercise or two from the first chapter) to read fairly rapidly through the whole book without stopping to do the exercises or to look up the suggested material in other manuals, and only then come back to work through this book more slowly and carefully second time round, trying out all the exercises and looking up all the other suggested material. This approach could have a number of benefits: by enabling you to satisfy your natural curiosity about what is coming next in the first read-through, it should help you to curb the urge to race through too quickly, skimping on the exercises and external cross-references, which you can follow up when you come to read through it second time round. It should also give you an initial overview so that when you come to read this book through more carefully second time round it will be with at least some idea of how the parts fit into the whole.

Again there's more than one way you can use the exercises. You can, if you wish, take them literally and try to implement exactly what they suggest. Or, if you're primarily anxious to get on with your own game, you could try to think of something in your own game that's analogous to the exercise being proposed and then go ahead and implement that, perhaps studying the source code of the sample game when one's suggested to get ideas for your own game. That way, you will be able to make progress with your own game while still following this manual in a reasonably systematic fashion. If you do try the exercises, you might like to know that suggested solutions to some of them are provided in the same directory as this book.

## 1.2. What You Need to Know Before You Start

It is assumed that anyone reading this book has a reasonable idea of what Interactive Fiction is, how it's played, and what its basic conventions are, otherwise they wouldn't be wanting to learn how to program in TADS 3. But you may need instructions on how to set up and compile a game in adv3Lite. You can find all the information you need on how to install and set up a TADS 3 development environment in the [quick start guide](../../../quickstart/quickstart.html) on the main page. (This replaces the instructions originally here in the PDF, because the information was out of date. --- ED)

[Return to table of contents](LearningT3Lite.html)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[Go to next chapter &raquo;](2-map-making--rooms.html)
