\-\-- layout: article title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../ styleType: article \-\-- \# 11. Nested Rooms \## 11.1.
Nested Room Basics Back in chapter 5 we discussed the containment model
in adv3Lite, and saw how various classes such as \`Container\` and
\`Surface\` can be used to put things in and on. But while these classes
can contain \*things\*, they can\'t contain \*actors\*, and, in
particular they can\'t contain the player character; or rather they
don\'t provide any handling for the player character and other actors to
get in and out of them. It doesn\'t take much to change that in
adv3Lite. In order to make an object an actor can get on, all we need to
do is to give it a \`contType\` of \`On\` and then define \`isBoardable
=true\`. In most cases, though, it will be easier just to use the
\`Platform\` class, which does all that for us (a Platform is a
\`Surface\` with \`isBoardable = true\`). Similarly to make something an
actor can get in, we just need an object with \`contType = In\` and
\`isEnterable = true\`, and again there\'s a \`Booth\` class that does
that for us (a \`Booth\` is a \`Container\` with \`contType = In\`).
Platforms and Booths are objects that aren\'t rooms but which can
contain an actor; they\'re typically used to implement items of
furniture and the like. Getting on or off a Platform or in or out of a
Booth doesn\'t count as travel and doesn\'t trigger any travel
notifications. If the player types OUT when the player character is on a
Platform or in a Booth, it\'s taken as a command to get off or out. For
the most part, we can use Nested Rooms in a fairly straightforward,
intuitive way. For example, to set up a small bedroom with a single bed
and a wooden chair, we could just do this: bedroom: Room \'Bedroom\'
\"This bedroom is so small that there\'s little space for anything apart
from the single bed crammed hard against the wall. The only wayout is
via the door to the east. \" east = bedroomDoor out asExit(east) ; +
bedroomDoor: Door \'\'door\'; + bed: Platform, Heavy \'single bed\' ; +
woodenChair: Platform \'wooden chair; small\' initSpecialDesc = \"A
small wooden chair next to the bed takes up most of the spare space in
the room. \"; With this definition, the player could get on the chair,
or on the bed. The bed is too heavy to pick up, but the player character
can pick up the chair and can also put it on the bed. It\'s also
possible to get on the chair while the chair is on the bed. There is one
subtlety: if the player types \`out\` while the player character is on
the bed, the player character will get off the bed; if the player then
types \`out\` again the player character will go through the door. If,
however the player types \`east\` while the player character is on the
bed, the player character will get off the bed (via an implicit action)
and then go through the door. That\'s \*almost\* all you need to know
about Nested Rooms in adv3Lite; but not quite. In the remainder of the
chapter we\'ll look at some of the potential complications. The first
one is this: what happens when there\'s something you want to be able to
both get on and get in? Well, that depends on what exactly you have in
mind. If what you want is a bed, say, that responds to GET ON BED or GET
IN BED in exactly the same way, then you could simply define the bed as
a Platform and then make GET IN behave like GET ON and GET OUT like GET
OFF using the \`asDobjFor()\` macro, like this: bed: Platform, Heavy
\'bed\' dobjFor(Enter) asDobjFor(Board) dobjFor(GetOutOf)
asDobjFor(GetOff) ; If, on the other hand, what you have in mind is
something like a large cabinet the player character could either squeeze
inside or get on top of, then you need to use the kind of multiple
containment techniques we met in chapter 5, for example: cabinet: Heavy
\'tall metal cabinet; green\' \"It\'s just tall enough for you to
squeeze inside, but not sotall that you couldn\'t climb on top of it. \"
remapOn: SubComponent { isBoardable = true } remapIn: SubComponent {
isEnterable = true } ; \## 11.2. Nested Rooms and Postures Adv3Lite
makes no attempt to track the postures of actors so STAND ON BED, SIT ON
BED and LIE ON BED all mean the same as GET ON BED, just as SIT IN
CABINET, LIE IN CABINET, and STAND IN CABINET would all mean the same as
GET IN CABINET.\[\^1\] \[\^1\]: If you really need to track the postures
of actors, there\'s a postures.t extension that comes in the extensions
directory of your adv3Lite installation; but for most games this is
unlikely to be either necessary or beneficial. That\'s true, at least,
unless the game author wants to make a slight distinction between them.
While the \*effects\* of STAND ON BED, SIT ON BED, LIE ON BED and GET ON
BED are all the same, we can, if we wish, treat them slightly
differently in terms of which we\'re prepared to allow, and which we may
prefer. A small wooden chair is probably something the player character
couldn\'t actually lie on, so although in one sense LIE ON CHAIR means
the same as GET ON CHAIR, we might just want to disallow the former and
allow the latter for the sake of slightly greater realism. If we want to
do this, we can do so by setting \`canLieOnMe\` to nil (and likewise for
\`canStandOnMe\` and \`canSitOnMe\`). The effect is a subtle one, but it
may be worthwhile. It\'s also one that may have a desirable knock-on
effect. If the player types the command \`lie down\`, since adv3Lite
provides no means for the player character to change posture, the
command will be treated as meaning \`lie on\` with a missing direct
object. The game will then prompt the player for the missing direct
object (\"What do you want to lie on?\") \*unless\* there\'s one object
in scope that scores better for this action than any other. If we rule
out lying down on the chair, then the bed is the only candidate, so
\`lie down\` will be taken to mean \`lie on bed\` without the player
being prompted for the missing direct object. But what happens if the
player types \`sit\`? Presumably it should be possible to sit on either
the bed or the chair, but other things being equal we might think the
chair is the better choice. We can signal this by giving it a higher
\`sitOnScore\` than the bed (the default being 100; we could also use
\`standOnScore\` and \`lieOnScore\` in the same way). So, with these
minor refinements, our little bedroom might become: bedroom: Room
\'Bedroom\' \"This bedroom is so small that there\'s little space for
anything apart from the single bed crammed hard against the wall. The
only way outis via the door to the east. \" east = bedroomDoor out
asExit(east); + bedroomDoor: Door \'\'door\' ; + bed: Platform, Heavy
\'single bed\' ; + woodenChair: Chair \'wooden chair; small\'
initSpecialDesc = \"A small wooden chair next to the bed takes up most
of the spare space in the room. \" canLieOnMe = nil sitOnScore = 120\`;
\## 11.3. Other Features of Nested Rooms \### 11.3.1. Nested Rooms and
Bulk It\'s worth bearing in mind that actors have bulk and Nested Rooms
have a \`bulkCapacity\`; in other words, who or what can fit into a
NestedRoom may be limited by bulk. Since by default everything has a
\`bulk\` of 0 and a \`bulkCapacity\` of 10000, this won\'t present any
limitations unless you start defining the \`bulk\`, \`bulkCapacity\` and
\`maxSingleBulk\` of various objects. In the case of nested rooms you
may wish to do so, for example, if you want a chair that\'s just big
enough for one person to sit on. Giving the chair the same bulkCapacity
as the bulk you assigned to actors would then prevent the player
character from sitting on Aunt Florence\'s favourite armchair while it
was occupied by Aunt Florence. It could also be used to prevent the
player from getting in a trunk that was already filled with junk, for
example. \### 11.3.2. Dropping Things in Nested Rooms If the player
character drops an object while in a Nested Room the game must decide
whether the thing that has just been dropped ends up in the Nested Room
or in the Nested Room\'s location. Dropping something while on a large
rug is likely to result in the object\'s falling onto the Platform.
Dropping something while on a small chair is likely to result in the
object\'s falling into the chair\'s enclosing room. Which of these is
chosen depends on the value of the \`dropLocation\` property of the
actor\'s immediate container. By default this is \`self\`, meaning that
an object dropped while an actor is in a nested room will end up in or
on that nested room (Booth or Platform). For a small nested room like a
small chair, you could change this so that, for example, the
\`dropLocation\` is the location of the chair, for example: +
woodenChair: Chair \'wooden chair; small\' initSpecialDesc = \"A small
wooden chair next to the bed takes up most of the spare space in the
room. \" canLieOnMe = nil sitOnScore = 120 dropLocation = location \`;
Note that you can also define the \`dropLocation\` property on a Room,
if you wish. This might be useful if you have a room representing a
space well off the ground, such as the top of a tree or the top of a
mast. You could then define the dropLocation to be the ground or deck
below, so that items dropped at the top of the tree or mast ended up
falling to the room below and rather than suspended in mid-air. \###
11.3.3. Enclosed Nested Rooms By default a Nested Room is open to its
immediate surroundings; an actor sitting on a chair in the lounge is
still treated as being in the lounge; a \`look \`command will describe
the lounge, and everything in the lounge is reachable from the chair.
If, however, the player character goes inside an openable Booth and
closes it, then unless the Booth is transparent, s/he will not be able
to see out into the enclosing room. In such a case the Nested Room\'s
\`roomTitle\` property will be used as the name of the player
character\'s current location, and the \`interiorDesc\` property used to
provide an internal description of the NestedRoom for the purposes of a
\`look\` command. Of course, if the player character shuts himself
inside an opaque Booth with no source of light, he won\'t be able to see
anything at all; but we can then override the \`darkName\` and
\`darkDesc\` properties of the Booth to provide custom versions just as
we can for a Room. By default, the \`roomTitle\` of a Nested Room is
simply its name. \### 11.3.4. Staging and Exit Locations If the player
character is on a bed and wants to get on a chair elsewhere in the same
room, the command \`get on chair \`shouldn\'t just teleport him from one
nested room to the other. The player character first needs to leave the
bed before s/he can get on the chair. To enforce this adv3Lite uses the
\`stagingLocation\` property, which contains the location an actor needs
to be in in order to enter or board the nested room in question. For
most nested rooms the \`stagingLocation\` will simply be the same as the
location, although for nested rooms that are SubComponents of some
multiply-containing objects the \`stagingLocation\` will be the
lexicalParent\'s location, i.e. the location of the mutliply-containing
object. The rule that an actor must be in a nested room\'s
\`stagingLocation\` before entering or boarding it is enforced in the
\`actorInStagingLocation\` precondition, which will attempt to move the
actor into the staging location via one or more implicit actions. Note
that this is only enforced if the actor is outside the nested room. If
the actor is on a chair that\'s resting on a stage, for example, then
\`get on stage \`will not trigger an attempt to move the actor to the
stage\'s \`stagingLocation\`; the actor will simply be moved straight to
the stage. The converse of the \`stagingLocation\` is the
\`exitLocation\`, which is where the actor is moved to in response to a
command to \`get off \`or\` get out of\` the object in question. The
\`exitLocation\` is also defined by default to be either the object\'s
location or, if appropriate, the location of its lexicalParent, whereas
by default the \`stagingLocation\` is the same as the \`exitLocation\`.
\## 11.4. Vehicles Occasionally you may want a nested room the player
character can move around in or on, like a bicycle, a magic carpet or a
cart. Such objects are often called \*vehicles\* in Interactive Fiction.
To create a vehicle in adv3Lite you just define a Booth or Platform in
the normal way and then define \`isVehicle =true\` on it. For example,
to make a basic bicycle you might do this: bike: Platform \'bicycle; old
battered; bike\' \"It\'s your old battered bike, still serviceable
though. \" isVehicle = true canLieOnMe = nil canStandOnMe = nil; The
player can now issue the commands \`get on bike\` or \`sit on bike\` to
get the player character on the bicycle. Once the player character is on
the bike, any movement commands like \`north\` or \`climb stairs\` will
move the bicycle with the player character on it. That, of course,
raises the question whether the player character \*ought\* to be allowed
to climb the stairs while riding the bike. The solution to this
potential problem lies in the fact that when an actor is moving around
in or on a vehicle, it\'s the vehicle rather than the actor that passed
as the \*traveler\* parameter to the various methods that take a
traveler parameter. We could thus define a \`bikeBarrier\`
\`TravelBarrier\` to put on any TravelConnectors we don\'t think the
bike should be allowed to traverse. bikeBarrier: TravelBarrier
canTravelerPass(traveler, connector) { return traveler != bike; }
explainTravelBarrier(traveler, connector) { \"{I} {can\\\'t} ride the
bike \<\>.\"; } ; This, incidentally, illustrates why the TravelBarrier
class takes a \*connector\* parameter in its methods. Since our
bikeBarrier could be used on any number of TravelConnectors, we need to
be able to phrase the message in \`explainTravelBarrier()\` in such a
way that it will suit any one of them. The \*connector\* parameter of
\`explainTravelBarrier\` gives us the TravelConnector that\'s being
attempted, and its \`traversalMsg\` property gives us a snippet of text
like \'up the staircase\' or \'through the front door\' that can be used
to complete a sentence of the type shown above. \## 11.5. Reaching In
and Out The normal convention in Interactive Fiction is that everything
in the current room is within reach of an actor located there, possibly
on the assumption that the actor will unobtrusively move round the space
delineated by the \'room\' to interact with whatever\'s needed. This
assumption becomes a bit less plausible, however, if the actor is
located in a nested room, sitting on a chair, for example. In such a
case, one of three things could happen. First, if the player character
needs to reach an object that\'s across the room we could just ignore
the lack of realism involved and let the player character take it
without moving from the chair. Second, we could block the player
character\'s access to objects outside the chair by saying something
like \"You can\'t reach the green book from the chair.\" Or third, we
could enforce the rule that the player character can\'t reach across the
room from the chair, but automate making the player character leave the
chair in order to reach an object placed elsewhere in the room. None of
these solutions is obviously the \'right\' one to be preferred above the
others, and adv3Lite allows us to choose which we want to use in any
given case. We can do so by taking advantage of the following
properties/methods (which we would need to defined on the chair or other
nested room the player character might be occupying):
\`allowReachOut(obj)\` and \`autoGetOutToReach\`. If
\`allowReachOut(obj)\` returns true, then an actor on the chair or other
nested room can reach out to touch \*obj\* without leaving the nested
room; if it returns nil then s/he can\'t. This allows us to treat
different objects differently, depending on how we envisage them being
spatially related to the nested room. Note that adv3Lite assumes that an
actor can always reach the nested room or objects inside the nested room
in any case, so we don\'t need to cater for such obviously accessible
objects in our \`allowReachOut(obj)\` method. If \`allowReachOut(obj)\`
returns nil, then if \`autoGetOutToReach\` is true, the actor will
automatically leave the nested room in order to reach \*obj\*; otherwise
if \`autoGetOutToReach\` is nil the attempt to reach obj will fail with
a suitable message explaining that \*obj\* can\'t be reached. So, for
example, if the player character starts out on bed and we want him/her
to have to leave the bed in order to touch anything else in the room we
might do something like this: me: Thing location = bed isFixed = true
person = 2 contType = Carrier ; bedroom: Room \'bedroom\' \"This is your
bedroom\...\"; + bed: Platform, Heavy \'bed\' allowReachOut(obj) {
return nil; } autoGetOutToReach = true; ; + table: Surface \'table\' ;
++ note: Thing \'note\' \"You suspect it may be important, but you\'d
need to read it to be sure. \" readDesc = \"You have five minutes to get
out of here before this house burns down around you! \" dobjFor(Read) {
preCond = \[objHeld\] } ; In this case the player can see that there\'s
an important note on the table, but the player character can\'t actually
read the note without holding it, and to do that s/he needs to leave the
bed. In this case an attempt to read the note will trigger an implicit
take action which in turn will trigger an attempt to get off the bed in
order to reach the note. The complement to reaching out is reaching in,
and we can also control that, or indeed, just reaching. This may or may
not involve nested rooms, and in any case works a little differently
from the \`allowReachOut\` mechanism we have just seen. Reaching and
reaching in are controlled by two methods, \`checkReach(actor)\` and
\`checkReachIn(actor,target)\`. The \`checkReach(actor)\` method
determines whether \*actor\* can reach the object \`checkReach()\` is
defined on; \`checkReachIn(actor,target)\` determines whether \*actor\*
can reach inside the object on which it\'s defined to reach \*target\*.
By default \`checkReachIn(actor, target)\` simply calls
\`checkReach(actor)\`, on the assumption that if an actor can\'t reach
an object, that actor will also be unable to reach that object\'s
contents. Unlike \`allowReachOut()\`, these two methods should not
return true or nil; instead they should either do nothing or else
display a message explaining why the object on which they\'re defined
can\'t be reached. If they display anything it will be assumed that
reaching is not possible; if they don\'t then it will be assumed that
they\'re not objecting to the reach. This mechanism can be used for a
number of purposes, for example to make an object too hot to touch
(perhaps until it cools down) or else out of reach on a high shelf
(until the player character gets on a chair to reach it, say). We could
implement the second of these scenarios like so: + Surface, Fixture
\'high shelf\' checkReach (actor) { if(!actor.isIn(woodenChair)) \"The
shelf is too high up for you to reach. \"; } ; ++ torch: Flashlight
\'flashlight; ; torch\' ; + woodenChair: Platform \'wooden chair\' ; In
this example, there\'s a flashlight (which the player presumably needs
in order to visit some dark room or other) resting on the high shelf. In
order to reach either the high shelf or anything on it (such as the
flashlight) the player character needs to stand on the wooden chair. As
previously indicated, we\'re not restricted to using this mechanism for
situations where an object may be too far away; we can use it for \*any
\*situation in which an object might become untouchable. For example,
suppose we have an iron poker which we can put in a fire, which gets
hotter the longer we leave it there, and which eventually becomes too
hot to touch. Rather than trying to trap every action that involves
touching the poker, we can simply make it out of reach with the
\`checkReach()\` method: poker: Thing \'iron poker\' \"It\'s \<\>. \"
isRedHot = nil checkReach(actor) { if(isRedHot) \"It\'s too hot to
touch! \"; } ; All the methods and properties we have defined in this
section are defined on Thing, so they\'re not restricted to being used
with nested rooms. Exercise 18: Create a one-room game consisting of the
Player Character\'s bedsit. This will contain a bed (of course) under
which is a drawer containing a pillow. There\'s also a desk, a swivel
chair (too unstable to stand on) and an armchair (too heavy to move), as
well as a large sofa that\'s large enough to lie on. Above the desk is a
high bookshelf on which is a solitary book. To reach the shelf or the
book the player character must stand on the desk. On another wall is a
high bunk bed which can only be reached via a ladder that\'s currently
stored under the desk. Beneath the bunk bed is a wooden bench seat,
attached to the wall; there\'s insufficient headroom under the bunk bed
to stand on the bench, and insufficient headroom above it to stand on
the bunk. Also on the floor under the bunk is a sleeping cat. Finally,
there\'s an openable wardrobe that\'s large enough to walk into; inside
the wardrobe is a hanging rail on which is a solitary coat-hanger. If
you\'re feeling really adventurous make it so that in general an actor
inside a Nested Room can\'t reach outside it (there will need to be
exceptions to this), and will automatically be taken out of the Nested
Room if s/he tries. \[« Go to previous
chapter\](10-darkness-and-light.html)    \[Return to table of
contents\](LearningT3Lite.html)    \[Go to next chapter
»\](12-locks-and-other-gadgets.html)
