\-\-- layout: article title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../ styleType: article \-\-- \# 15. MultiLocs and Scenes
\## 15.1. MultiLocs At a stretch we could regard MultiLocs and Scenes as
complementary: MultiLocs cater for one object being in several places at
the same time, while Scenes divide up time rather than space. In
reality, though, the only reason for putting them both in the same
chapter is that we need to cover them both but neither merits a whole
chapter to itself. We\'ll start with MultiLocs. Generally, the
whereabouts of an object in an adv3Lite game is defined by its
\`location\` property, which would suggest that, like most objects in
the real world, an object can only be in one place at a time. But there
are three situations where we really do want a game object to be in
several places at once: 1. The object in question straddles the border
of several rooms, such as a fountain that stands at the centre of a
square we\'ve implemented as four different rooms. 2. The object is a
distant object (like the sun, the moon, or a faraway mountain) that\'s
visible from many different locations. 3. The object is a Decoration (a
bunch of trees in a forest, say, or a plain vanilla ceiling in a house)
identical instances of which occur in several places. For these three
situations we can use the \`MultiLoc\` class. \`MultiLoc\` is a mix-in
class which generally needs to precede one or more Thing-derived classes
in any class list. There are a number of ways in which we can specify
which locations a MultiLoc object is present in: 1. We can simply list
its locations in its \`locationList \`property; so, for example, for the
fountain at the centre of a square we might define l\`ocationList=
\[squareNE, squareNW, squareSE, squareSW\]\`. Note that this property
(or \`initialLocationList\`, which we can use for the same purpose) can
contain Regions as well as Rooms and Things. 2. We can define its
\`initialLocationClass\` to be a class of object every member of which
contains the MultiLoc in question. For example, if we were implementing
an object to represent the sun we\'d probably define
\`initialLocationClass =OutdoorRoom \`(supposing we had defined a
suitable OutdoorRoom class)\`.\` We can refine this further, if we wish,
by overriding the \`isInitiallyIn(obj)\` method; for example if we
wanted the sun to appear in every OutdoorRoom \*except\* those of the
our ForestRoom class (where the leafy canopy obscures the sun) we could
additionally define i\`sInitiallyIn(obj) { return
!obj.ofKind(ForestRoom); } . 3. We can simply also define an
\`exceptions\` list so that the MultiLoc will start out in every
location defined by either of the first two methods except for those
listed in \`exceptions\`. So, for example, if we\'d defined OutdoorRoom
and ForestRoom classes, where ForestRoom was a subclass of OutdoorRoom,
we might define a Distant object to represent the sun in all those
places like so: sun: MultiLoc, Distant \'sun; bright\' \"It\'s too
bright to look at for long. \" initialLocationClass = OutdoorRoom
isInitiallyIn(obj) { return !obj.ofKind(ForestRoom); } ; Similarly, if
we wanted a fountain to stand at the centre of a square comprising four
different rooms, we could define it thus: fountain: MultiLoc, Container,
Fixture \'fountain; ornamental\' \"It\'s in the form of some improbable
mythical beast gushing water out of an unmentionable orifice. \"
locationList = \[squareNE, squareNW, squareSE, squareSW\] ; We\'ve made
the fountain a Container because we\'re envisaging it as the kind of
fountain people could throw coins into. Note that if the player
character were to throw a coin into the fountain, s/he\'d be able to
retrieve it equally well from any of the four corners of the square,
since the fountain is in all of them. Note also that although in this
example (and in many common uses of MultiLoc) the locations the MultiLoc
is present in are all Rooms, there\'s no rule restricting us to using
Rooms; it\'s legal to use \*any\* Thing-derived object as a MultiLoc
location (as it is for the location of any Thing). It\'s also legal to
use one or more Regions. These two uses of MultiLoc are quite safe,
because both the sun and the fountain are the same sun or fountain from
whichever location they\'re viewed. If we\'re going to use MultiLoc to
represent qualitatively similar but numerically distinct items like
trees in a forest or ceilings in the room of a house we have to be a bit
more careful. Normally we should only implement simple Decoration
objects in this way, that is, objects that allow only the very minimum
of interaction (examining, and perhaps smelling, listening to or
feeling). We certainly shouldn\'t use MultiLocs to represent any set of
similar objects where one of those objects might change state
independently of the others. Don\'t, for example, use a MultiLoc,
Decoration to represent trees in the forest and then allow the player to
start cutting down trees, since once one tree is cut down, they all will
be! In such a case it\'s better to create a custom Tree class and
arrange for one instance of it to be in each forest location. We can use
the \`isIn(loc)\`, \`isDirectlyIn(loc)\` and \`isOrIsIn(loc)\` methods
to test whether a MultiLoc is in \*loc\* (these methods are overridden
on MultiLoc to give sensible results). To a limited extent we can also
determine the location of a MultiLoc by inspecting its \`location\`
property. Strictly speaking this should be meaningless, because a
MultiLoc is normally in several locations at once, but for many purposes
what we\'re actually interested in is whether the MultiLoc is in the
same location as the actor, or at least a location in the same room as
the actor, so MultiLoc\'s location property will return nil if the
MultiLoc isn\'t anywhere at all, a location within the current actor\'s
current room (or the actor\'s current room itself) if the Multiloc is
present there, or the location the MultiLoc was last seen at, if there
is one, or, failing all that, the first location in the MultiLoc\'s
\`locationList\` (which may have been updated since it was originally
defined). This should generally give a usable result, provided that
it\'s used with reasonable awareness of its limitations. We can use
\`moveInto(loc) \`to move a MultiLoc, but the effect will be to move it
out of all its existing locations leaving it only in \*loc\*. In some
cases this may be just what we want, of course; for example, at sunset
we could call \`sun.moveInto(nil)\` to remove the sun from everywhere at
once. On other occasions we might want to be more selective what we\'re
moving a MultiLoc in and out of, in which case we can use: -
\`moveIntoAdd(loc)\` \-- make the MultiLoc present in \*loc\* without
removing it from any of its existing locations. - \`moveOutOf(loc)\` \--
remove the MultiLoc from \*loc\* (without affecting the MultiLoc\'s
presence anywhere else). \## 15.2. Scenes Rooms and Regions can be used
to divide up a game spatially. If we want to divide it up temporally we
can use Scenes. A \`Scene\` is simply an object that represents a state
of affairs that is ongoing for the time being, but which may have a
definite start-point and end-point within the game. (Users familiar with
Inform 7 might like to know that adv3Lite Scenes are very similar to
Inform 7 Scenes, from which they are shamelessly \'borrowed\'). To
expand on that slightly, we can define a \`Scene\` such that it starts
when a particular condition becomes true, and ends when another
condition becomes true. We can also define what happens when the Scene
starts and ends, and what happens each turn when it is current. We can
test how long a Scene has been going on for, whether it\'s currently
happening or whether it has happened and how it ended, and we can use
the currency of a particular Scene on the during condition of a Doer (as
explained in Chapter 6 above). The properties and methods we can define
on Scene are as follows: - \`startsWhen\`: an expression or method that
evaluates to true when you want the scene to start. - \`endsWhen\`: an
expression or method that evaluates to something other than nil when you
want the scene to end. Often you would simply make this return true when
you want the scene to end, but if you wanted to note different kinds of
scene ending you could return some other value (which could be a number,
a single-quoted string, an enum or an object) to represent how the scene
ends. - \`isRecurring\`: Normally a scene will only occur once. Set
\`isRecurring\` to true if you want the scene to start again every time
its startsWhen condition is true. - \`whenStarting\`: A method that
executes when the scene starts; you can use it to define what happens at
the start of the scene. - \`whenEnding\`: A method that executes when
the scene ends; you can use it to define what happens at the end of the
scene. - \`eachTurn\`: A method that executes every turn that the scene
is active. In addition your code can query the following properties of a
Scene object (which should be treated as read-only by game-code since
they\'re updated by library code): - \`isHappening\`: Flag (true or nil)
to indicate whether this scene is currently taking place. -
\`hasHappened\`: Flag (true or nil) to indicate whether this scene has
ever happened (and ended). - \`startedAt\`: The turn number at which
this scene started (or nil if this scene is yet to happen). -
\`endedAt\`: The turn number at which this scene ended (or nil if this
scene is yet to end). - \`timesHappened\`: The number of times this
scene has happened. - \`howEnded\`: An optional author-defined flag
indicating how the scene ended (this could be a number, a single-quoted
string, an enum or an object). The \`howEnded\` property deserves a
further word of explanation. You can use this more or less how you like,
but one coding pattern might be to use custom objects to represent
different endings and then make use of the methods and properties of
your custom objects. For example, suppose a certain scene ends
tragically if Martha is dead but happily if you give Martha the gold
ring, you might do something like this: class SceneEnding: object
whenEnding() { } ; happyEnding: SceneEnding whenEnding() { \"A surge of
happiness washes over you\...\"; } ; tragicEnding: SceneEnding
whenEnding() { \"You feel inconsolable at your loss\...\"; } ;
marthaScene: Scene startsWhen = Q.canSee(me, martha) endsWhen() {
if(martha.isDead) return tragicEnding; if(goldRing.isIn(martha)) return
happyEnding; return nil; } whenEnding() { if(howEnded != nil)
howEnded.whenEnding(); } ; One special point to note: if you define the
\`startsWhen\` condition of a Scene so that it is true right at the
start of play (e.g. \`startsWhen =true\`), the Scene will become active,
and its \`whenStarting()\` method will execute, just \*after \*the first
room description is displayed. This makes it easy to use the Scene to
display some initial text after the first room description using its
\`whenStarting\` method, e.g.: introScene: Scene startsWhen =
(harry.isIn(harrysBed)) endsWhen = (!harry.isIn(harrysBed)) whenEnding()
{ \"Harry stretches and yawns, before staggering uncertainlyacross the
room. \"; } whenStarting = \"Harry groans. \" ; Note that when we just
want a method to display some text, we \*can\* define it as a full-blown
method, like \`whenEnding()\` in the above example, or we can just use a
double-quoted string, as in the \`whenStarting \`method. Both have the
same effect here. \[« Go to previous
chapter\](14-non-player-characters.html)    \[Return to table of
contents\](LearningT3Lite.html)    \[Go to next chapter
»\](16-senses-and-sensory-connections.html)
