\-\-- layout: article title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../ styleType: article \-\-- \# 16. Senses and Sensory
Connections \## 16.1. The Four Other Senses Adv3Lite comes with handling
for five senses: sight, sound, smell, touch and taste. The most
elaborate provision is made for sight; the provision for the other four
senses is fairly basic, but slightly fuller for sound and smell than for
taste and touch. We \*can\* handle all four of the non-visual senses in
a similar fashion by defining \`listenDesc\`, \`smellDesc\`,
\`feelDesc\` and \`tasteDesc\` to provide responses to \`listen to\`,
\`smell\`, \`feel\` and \`taste\` respectively; for example: apple: Food
\'apple; round green red sweet firm juicy; fruit\[pl\]\' \"It\'s round,
with patches of both red and green. \" feelDesc = \"It feels
reassuringly firm. \" tasteDesc = \"It tastes sweet at juicy. \"
listenDesc = \"The apple is obstinately silent. \" smellDesc =
\"There\'s the faintest sweet apple smell. \"\`; In order to be able to
taste something the player character has to be able to touch it, and in
order to be able to touch it the player character has to be in the same
room as the object s/he wants to touch without any obstacles (such as a
closed container, or a \`checkReach()\` method that forbids reaching) to
prevent the object from being touched. As we shall see below, it\'s
sometimes possible to see, smell and hear objects that are in remote
locations, but it is never possible to touch or taste them. Smell and
sound are different from taste and touch in another respect. The
commands \`touch \`and\` taste \`can\'t be used without specifying an
object to be touched or tasted, e.g. \`touch apple \`or\` taste apple\`.
But \`smell\` and \`listen\` can both be used intransitively, without
specifying any particular object, in which case they\'ll list the
\`smellDesc\` or \`listenDesc\` of every object in scope that defines a
\`smellDesc\` or \`listenDesc\`. If we want to exclude an object from
such a listing (because we reckon its sound or smell wouldn\'t obtrude
on the player character unless s/he explicitly listened to or smelt that
particular object), we could set its isProminentNoise and/or
isProminentSmell properties to nil, e.g.: apple: Food \'apple; round
green red sweet firm juicy; fruit\[pl\]\' \"It\'s round, with patches of
both red and green. \" feelDesc = \"It feels reassuringly firm. \"
tasteDesc = \"It tastes sweet at juicy. \" listenDesc = \"The apple is
obstinately silent. \" smellDesc = \"There\'s the faintest sweet apple
smell. \" isProminentNoise = nil isProminentSmell = nil ; One further
respect in which sound and smell differ from the other three senses is
that we can define objects to represent a \`Noise\` or a \`Odor\`
distinct from any physical object that may be giving off that noise or
smell. For this we just define the \`desc\` property of the Noise or
Smell to respond to \`listen to noise\` or \`smell odor\` (or to
examining either of them). For example: cave: Room \'Large Cave\'
\"There\'s general smell of dampness here, as well as the sound of
dripping water. \" ; + Odor \'smell of dampness; pervasive musty; damp\'
\"It\'s a pervasive, musty smell. \"; + Noise \'sound of dripping water;
continuous\' \"You can\'t locate where it\'s coming from, but it\'s
quitecontinuous. \" ; These objects will respond to \`smell smell of
dampness\` and \`listen to sound of dripping water\`, but will refuse
just about any other command with a message like \"You can\'t do that to
a smell/sound.\" They effectively work as decoration objects, which
means that if there was another object representing water in the cave,
say, a command like \`taste water \`would be directed to the water
without disambiguation. Note that \`Odor\` and \`Noise\` objects won\'t
be listed in response to intransitive smell and listen commands unless
you explicitly give them \`smellDesc\` and \`listenDesc\` properties, in
which case the \`smellDesc\` or \`listenDesc\` will be used in response
to the intransitive smell or listen, while the \`desc\` will be used in
response to the transitive \`smell smell\` or \`listen to noise\`. So,
for example, in the above case we might better have written: cave: Room
\'Large Cave\' \"There\'s general smell of dampness here, as well as the
sound of dripping water. \" ; + Odor \'smell of dampness; pervasive
musty; damp\' \"It\'s a pervasive, musty smell. \" smellDesc =
\"There\'s a pervasive smell of damp in the cave. \"; + Noise \'sound of
dripping water; continuous\' \"You can\'t locate where it\'s coming
from, but it\'s quitecontinuous. \" listenDesc = \"You can hear a
continuous dripping sound. \" ; It\'s not always appropriate to do this,
however, especially when the smell has already been mentioned on another
object. For example, if on an oven object we defined \`smellDesc =
\"There\'s a smell of burning coming from theoven\"\`, we might well
want to define an \`Odor\` object to represent the smell of burning, but
we wouldn\'t then give that \`Odor\` object a \`smellDesc\` as well. \##
16.2. Sensory Connections Sound, light and smells all travel. In the
standard IF model, the player character can only sense what\'s in the
same room as s/he is, but this may not always be realistic. We may, for
example, have implemented a very large hall as two or more rooms,
perhaps one room representing the east end and the other the west. Or we
may have done the same for a town square or a large field or a long
corridor. In such cases, whereas it\'s perfectly reasonable that the
player character cannot taste or touch anything in the other rooms,
it\'s not so reasonable that s/he cannot see, hear or smell them, since
in real life you\'d be able to see the other end of the hall, the other
corners of the square, the other parts of the field and so on. Ideally,
we need a mechanism to provide sensory connections between rooms in such
situations. In adv3Lite this mechanism is provided by the
\`SenseRegion\` class. A \`SenseRegion\` is a special kind of
\`Region\`; in other words its something that several rooms can be
defined as belonging to, in just the same way as they can be defined as
belonging to any other kind of Region. But unlike the basic \`Region\`
class, a \`SenseRegion\` provides sensory interconnections (by default
for sight, sound and smell) across all the rooms it contains. You set up
a \`SenseRegion\` in just the same way as you\'d set up an ordinary
\`Region\`, except that you declare it to be of the \`SenseRegion\`
class. For example to create a large hall comprising two rooms with a
sensory connection between the two ends of the hall you could do this:
hallRegion: SenseRegion ; eastHall: Room \'Hall (east)\' \'east end of
the hall\' \"This large hall continues to the west. \" west = westHall
regions = \[hallRegion\] ; westHall: Room \'Hall (west)\' \'west end of
the hall\' \"This large hall continues to the east. \" east = eastHall
regions = \[hallRegion\] ; We can customize the particular connections
any given \`SenseRegion\` allows by overriding the following properties
on it: - \`canSeeAcross\` \-- (true by default); is it possible to see
something in one room in this SenseRegion from another room in this
SenseRegion? - \`canHearAcross\` \-- (true by default); is it possible
to hear something in one room in this SenseRegion from another room in
this SenseRegion? - \`canSmellAcross\` \-- (true by default); is it
possible to smell something in one room in this SenseRegion from another
room in this SenseRegion? - \`canThrowAcross\` \-- (nil by default); is
it possible to throw something from one room in this SenseRegion at a
target in another room in this SenseRegion? (If not the projectile will
fall short into the room it was thrown from). - \`canTalkAcross\` \--
(nil by default); is it possible for an actor in one room in this
SenseRegion to talk to an actor in another room in this SenseRegion?
These properties are global, all-or-nothing, in that they allow either
everything or nothing to be seen, heard or smelled in remote locations.
This may not always be realistic; one might see a large scarecrow at the
other end of a field, but not a small buttercup; one might smell a
bonfire over the fence, but not a rose; one might hear the sound of
drumming from the far end of the hall but not the ticking of a quiet
clock. Adv3Lite allows us to model these situations by defining the
remote sensory properties of individual objects. The first way we can do
this is via the \`sightSize\`, \`soundSize\` and \`smellSize\`
properties of a Thing, each of which can be \`small\`, \`medium\` or
\`large \`(the default is\` medium\`). How these properties behave
depends on what else we do. Supposing we don\'t override or define any
of the methods we\'re about to discuss below, then the default behaviour
will be: - \`small\` \-- the object cannot be seen/heard/smelt from a
remote location. - \`medium\` \-- the object can be detected in the
relevant sense, but no detail can be made out (it will be described as
\'too far away to make out any detail\' or \'too far away to hear/smell
distinctly). - \`large\` \-- the object can be detected in the relevant
sense, and its normal desc, listenDesc or smellDesc will be shown in
response to an attempt to examine, listen to, or smell it. However,
there\'s two more series of methods that may further affect this
behaviour. Firstly, the set of methods (defined on Thing) that determine
whether a particular object can be detected by a given sense: -
\`isVisibleFrom(pov)\` \-- Is this object visible to pov? By default
this is true if sightSize is not small, but can be overridden to give
different results. - \`isAudibleFrom(pov)\` \-- Is this object audible
to pov? By default this is true is soundSize is not small, but can be
overridden to give different results. - \`isSmellableFrom(pov)\` \-- Is
this object smellable to pov? By default this is true if smellSize if
not small, but can be overridden to give different results. -
\`isReadableFrom(pov)\` \-- Can pov read what\'s written on this object?
By default this is true only if sightSize is large, but can be
overridden to give different results. In each case the \*pov\* parameter
is the point-of-view object, i.e. the actor doing the sensing (normally
the player character). Each of these methods could therefore test for
the location of the pov object before deciding whether the object
they\'re defined on can be sensed from there. In other words, once
we\'ve defined a number of rooms as belonging to the same
\`SenseRegion\` we can further refine which objects can be seen, heard,
smelt or read from particular rooms within that \`SenseRegion\`. This
probably works best on objects that are fixed in place, so that we can
be sure which room it\'s in when we\'re writing isXxxableFrom(pov)
routines to determine where it can be sensed from. Whereas it would be
possible to do this with portable objects, it\'s probably easier to
stick just to using their \`sightSize\`, \`smellSize\` and \`soundSize\`
properties unless we really do need finer-grained control. The other set
of methods that can affect the behaviour of these properties are the
remoteXxxDesc methods, namely: - \`remoteDesc(pov)\` \-- the description
of this object when examined from pov - \`remoteListenDesc(pov)\` \--
the description of this object when listened to from pov -
\`remoteSmellDesc(pov)\` \-- the description of this object when smelt
from pov Once again \*pov\* is the point-of-view object doing the
sensing, normally the player character. These three methods can thus be
used to describe what an object looks like, sounds like or smells like
from a remote point-of-view. If any of these methods is defined on an
object, it will be used regardless of the object\'s \`sightSize\`,
\`soundSize\` or \`smellSize\` (as the case may be), provided that the
corresponding \`isVisibleFrom(pov)\`, \`isAudibleFrom(pov)\` or
\`isSmellableFrom(pov)\` method returns true (which, by default, they
will if the corresponding size is not \`small\`). \## 16.3. Describing
Things in Remote Locations The properties and methods we have just
discussed determine what can be sensed from a remote location and how
remote objects are described when they are examined, listened to or
smelled. One further point that remains to be discussed is how objects
are listed in remote locations. You may recall that we can give an
object a paragraph of its own in the listing of objects in room
descriptions by giving it a \`specialDesc\` and/or \`initSpecialDesc\`.
The second of these, \`initSpecialDesc\` is used for as long as
\`isInInitState\` is true which, by default, is until the object is
moved (although we\'re free to change this if we want to use some other
condition, such as until the item is described). Provided a
\`specialDesc\` is defined we can also define
\`remoteSpecialDesc(pov)\`, where \*pov\* is the actor doing the viewing
(usually the player character). Provided an \`initSpecialDesc\` is
defined we can also correspondingly define
\`remoteInitSpecialDesc(pov)\`. In both cases the remote version will be
used when the actor and the object being listed are in different
top-level rooms, although their default behaviour is simply to use
\`specialDesc\` and \`initSpecialDesc\`. In the case of an Actor, the
\`remoteSpecialDesc(pov)\` method is farmed out to the current
ActorState, if there is one, otherwise \`actorRemoteSpecialDesc(pov)\`
is used; this parallels the use of \`specialDesc\` on an Actor. Where
neighbouring locations are connected by a SenseRegion, we need to use
\`remoteSpecialDesc()\` alongside \`specialDesc\` to make it clear when
we\'re listing something that\'s not in the player character\'s
immediate location, for example: + table: Surface, Heavy \'large wooden
table\' specialDesc = \"A large wooden table occupies much of
thefloor-space at this end of the room. \" remoteSpecialDesc(pov) {
switch(pov.getOutermostRoom) { case hallSouth: \"A large wooden table
stands at the far end of the hall.\"; break; case carPark: \"Through the
window you can see a large wooden table inthe hall. \"; break; } } ; In
addition to items that have a \`specialDesc\` or \`initSpecialDesc\`
defined, which get their own paragraphs in room descriptions, are the
miscellaneous portable items which are listed with a single sentence
like \"You see a glove, a rubber ball, a pair of green Wellington boots,
and an old walking stick here\". Once again, if some of these items are
in a remote location, this needs to be made clear to the player. The
library does try to take care of this, but the default results can be
rather crude. For example, suppose we define a long hall as two rooms in
the same SenseRegion, and we give the two ends of the hall the room name
\'Hall (east end)\' and \'Hall (west end)\'. From the west end of the
hall we might see a listing like: In the hall (east end), you see a
rubber duck. This could be more elegantly phrased, and with other room
names the effect can be even more jarring, e.g.: In the in front of a
cottage, you see a brass key. There are a number of ways we can fix
this. The first and simplest is to give rooms with award titles like
these a name property as well as a roomTitle property, for example:
hallEast: Room \'Hall (east)\' \'east end of the hall\' ; This would
suffice to give us the much improved: In the east end of the hall, you
see a rubber duck. For slightly greater control, we could override the
\`inRoomName(pov) \`method of the remote room, for example: hallEast:
Room \'Hall (east)\' \'east end of the hall\' inRoomName(pov) { return
\'at the far end of the hall\'; } ; Which would give us the arguably
even better (at least where there are only two rooms in the
SenseRegion): At the far end of the hall, you see a rubber duck. On the
other hand, if we had a long road with north, mid, and south sections,
then we might well use\` inRoomName(pov)\` on the middle section to vary
the name according to where we were being viewed from: roadMid: Room
\'Long Road (middle)\' \'the middle section of the road\' \"The long
road continues to north and south. \" north = roadNorth south =
roadSouth inRoomName(pov) { return \'further down the road to the
\<\>south \<\>north\<\>\'; } ; Whichever way we choose to change the way
the remote location is described, the list of miscellaneous portable
items in the remote location will always take the form, \"\*Location
phrase (e.g. at the far end of the hall) \*you see \*list of items\*.\"
If we want to change it further (that is, if we want the list introduced
with something other than \"you see\"), we need to override\`
remoteContentsLister \`on the room we\'re looking at\*. \*The simplest
way to use this is to make it return a new \`CustomRoomLister\` to which
we can pass the way we want a list of objects in the remote room to be
introduced as the argument to its constructor; for example: hallWest:
Room \'Hall (West End)\' \'the west end of the hall\' \"This large hall
continues to the east. A flight of stairs leadsdown to the south. \"
east = hallEast south = hallStairsDown down asExit(south)
remoteContentsLister = new CustomRoomLister(\'Right at the far end of
the hall {i} {catch} sight of \'); ; Note that if we do this, whatever
we define here will take precedence over whatever we did with
\`inRoomName(pov)\` on the remote room. Even with this device, we have
to introduce the list of items in the remote location with something
more or less equivalent to \"you see\". If we want to introduce it with
something equivalent to \"there is\" or \"there are\", we have to work a
little harder. The constructor to \`CustomRoomLister\` can call a number
of optional named arguments, one of which can be the definition of the
method we want to use to prefix the list with. So we could do something
like this: hall: Room \'Hall\' west = startRoom regions = \[hallRegion\]
inRoomName(pov) { return \'at the far end of the hall\'; }
remoteContentsLister = new CustomRoomLister(\'\', prefixMethod:
method(lst, pl,irName) { \"At the far end of the hall \<\>are\<\> is\<\>
\"; } ); ; In brief \`prefixMethod:\` means that we\'re passing the name
\`prefixMethod\` parameter here. This needs to be passed as a floating
method, which is effectively defined here with the following syntax:
method(lst, pl, irName){ \"At the far end of the hall \<\>are\<\> is\<\>
\"; } The \`prefixMethod\` for \`CustomRoomLister\` must be a method
that takes three arguments: \*lst\* \-- the list of objects to be
listed; \*pl\* \-- whether the list is grammatically singular or plural
(true means it\'s plural) and \*irName\*, the \`inRoomName(pov)\` of the
room it\'s being called on. Here we simply use the pl parameter to
determine whether the list of objects is grammatically singular or
plural (it\'s plural either if there\'s more than one item in the list,
or if the first item in the list is itself plural, e.g. \'flowers\') and
then to use \'are\' or \'is\' in the prefix text accordingly. If this
seems a bit baffling at first, don\'t worry about it for now, it \*is\*
quite an advanced technique, but it is at least worth being aware of.
There are a further pair of optional named parameters that can be passed
to the CustomRoomLister constructor: \`suffix\` and \`suffixMethod\`.
The former of these is just a piece of text in a singe-quoted string
that appears at the end of the list in place of a plain full stop (or
period). The latter is a floating method to append text to the end of a
list, for example: hall: Room \'Hall\' west = startRoom regions =
\[hallRegion\] inRoomName(pov) { return \'at the far end of the hall\';
} remoteContentsLister = new CustomRoomLister(\'\\\^\', suffixMethod:
method(lst, pl,irName) { \" \<\>are \<\> is\<\> \<\>.\"; } ); ; Which
might yield: A rubber duck is at the far end of the hall. Note in this
case how we passed a prefix string of \'\\\^\' to ensure that the
resultant sentence would start with a capital letter. \## 16.4. Remote
Communications There\'s one further type of remote sensing that can
sometimes turn up in Interactive Fiction, and that\'s where we want the
player character to talk to another actor via telephone or videophone,
particularly in a game set in the modern world where the protagonist is
quite likely to be carrying a mobile phone (or cell phone). This
situation would be awkward to model using a SenseRegion, so we instead
use the \`commLink\` object for this kind of remote communication. Using
\`commLink\` is quite straightforward. Mostly, we just call one or other
of its four commonly used methods: - \`connectTo(other)\` \-- establish
an audio-link between the player character and \*other\*, where
\*other\* will normally be another Actor. If this method is called as
\`connectTo(other,true)\`, then we establish an audio-visual link with
the other actor. - \`disconnect()\` - disconnect all audio and
audio-visual links between the player character and other actors. -
\`disconnectFrom(other)\` \-- disconnect the audio or audio-visual link
with \*other\* leaving any other communications links in place. The
\*other\* parameter may be supplied as a single actor or as a list of
actors. - \`isConnectedTo(other)\` \-- determines whether the player
character currently has a communications link to \*other\*; returns nil
if not, or \`AudioLink\` if there\'s an audio link, or \`VideoLink\` if
there\'s an audio-visual link. For example, a fairly basic
implementation of a PHONE command that allows the player character to
call other known actors using his/her mobile phone might look like this:
DefineTAction(Phone) addExtraScopeItems(role) { inherited(role);
scopeList =scopeList.appendUnique(Q.knownScopeList.subset({x:
x.ofKind(Actor)} )); } ; VerbRule(Phone) (\'phone\' \| \'call\')
singleDobj : VerbProduction action = Phone verbPhrase = \'phone/phoning
(whom)\' missinqQ = \'who do you want to phone\'; modify Thing
dobjFor(Phone) { verify() { illogical(\'{I} {can\\\'t} phone {that dobj}
. \'); } } ; modify Actor dobjFor(Phone) { preCond = new
ObjectPreCondition(mobilePhone, objHeld) verify() {
if(commLink.isConnectedTo(self)) illogicalNow(\'{I} {am} already talking
to {the dobj} onthe phone. \'); } action() { commLink.connectTo(self);
sayHello(); } } endConversation(reason) { /\* Don\'t end the
conversation if we\'re on the phone and wewalk about \*/
if(commLink.isConnectedTo(self) && reason == endConvLeave) return;
if(canEndConversation(reason)) { sayGoodbye(reason);
commLink.disconnectFrom(self); } /\* \* otherwise if the player char is
about to depart and theactor won\'t \* let the conversation end, block
the travel \*/ else if(reason == endConvLeave) exit; } ; Exercise 21:
Try implementing a game along the following lines. A town has to be
evacuated due to imminent flooding from a nearby river. In one corner of
the town square an old woman is sleeping on a bench. The player
character, a policeman, has to wake her and persuade her to leave, but
she proves resistant to being woken up. The square is large enough to
need implementing as four rooms (one for each corner), although they are
all visible from one another. An ornamental fountain, into which someone
has thrown a coin, stands in the centre of the square, and the water
gushing from the fountain makes a sound that should be audible
throughout the square. In another corner of the square stands a barrel
organ that can be played or pushed around; the player can try playing
the organ next to the old woman but this merely makes her wake up for a
moment, complain about the noise, and then go back to sleep, as does
shouting or blowing a whistle. Along the north side of the square runs a
building that can be entered from the northeast corner of the square.
Inside the building are two rooms, a hall and a chamber; the hall is
entered from the square, and the chamber has a window (too small to
crawl through) overlooking the northwest corner of the square. The
chamber contains a radio that can be heard in the hall (when it\'s
switched on) and in the square (when the window is open). It also
contains a whistle. The radio starts out inside a packing case which is
opaque to sight but transparent to sound. From the northwest corner of
the square you can go west into a park, which consists of two locations
visible from each other. A river (the one that\'s about to flood) runs
alongside the west side of the park. In the south end of the park
(nearest the square) a bonfire is smouldering by the river, letting off
acrid-smelling smoke. In the north end of the park (furthest from the
square) are a basket of rotting fish (stinking appropriately) and a tall
tree with a trumpet caught out of reach in its branches. The branch
holding the trumpet can be reached via the ladder that needs to be
fetched from the hall. Playing the trumpet in the immediate vicinity of
the old woman wakes her up fully and wins the game. \[« Go to previous
chapter\](15-multilocs-and-scenes.html)    \[Return to table of
contents\](LearningT3Lite.html)    \[Go to next chapter
»\](17-attachables.html)
