\-\-- layout: article title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../ styleType: article \-\-- \# 19. Beyond the Basics \##
19.1. Introduction We\'ve now covered all the basics of writing
Interactive Fiction in TADS 3 with adv3Lite; if you\'ve mastered
everything up to now you should be well on your way to being able to
carry out most common TADS 3/adv3Lite programming tasks without too much
difficulty. But the nature of IF programming means we often want to
carry out less common programming tasks; it\'s likely to be the unusual
that makes our game stands out. We can\'t cover everything TADS 3 and
adv3Lite can do here, but we can briefly survey some of the other
features that are likely to be of interest. In the present chapter we
shan\'t try to explain them in any detail; we\'ll simply introduce them
and give some brief pointers (in particular to where more information
can be found). \## 19.2. Parsing and Object Resolution \### 19.2.1.
Tokenizing and Preparsing Parsing is the business of reading the
player\'s command, matching it to an action the game can execute and
deciding which game objects it refers to; in case of ambiguity object
resolution is the business of narrowing down the possibilities to those
that are most likely. The standard cases have already been dealt with in
the two chapters on Actions. The first stage of interpreting a player\'s
command is to divide it up into tokens (roughly speaking, the individual
words that make up the command, so that the command \`take the knife\`
contains the tokens \'take\', \'the\' and \'knife\'). To do this the
parser uses the \`Tokenizer\` class. For details of how this works and
how it can be customized, see the chapter \"Basic Tokenizer\" in Part VI
of the \*System Manual\*. If \*str\* is a string we want to tokenize, we
can do so with a statement like: local toks = Tokenizer.tokenize(str);
There\'s seldom any need to do this in adv3Lite, but it\'s worth knowing
that the Parser deals with results of tokenizing the player input. For
some information on what the parser does with the tokens when matching
player input to action syntax and noun phrases, you could take a look at
the article on GrammarProd in Part IV of the \*System Manual\*, but
it\'s not the easiest read, and it\'s usually possible to be able to do
what you want in adv3Lite without understanding that part of the system
in any depth. It is sometimes useful to be able to intercept the
player\'s input and tweak it before the parser gets to work on it. For
this purpose we can use a \`StringPreParser\`. This class performs its
work in its \`doParsing(str,which)\` method, where \*str \*is the string
(initially the command typed by the player) containing the command we
may want to tweak. This method should return either the original or an
adjusted string, or nil. If it returns a new string, this will be used
instead of the command that was entered. If it returns nil, then the
command will be aborted (on the assumption that the \`StringPreParser\`
has fully dealt with it). For example, if we wanted to write a
particularly prudish game, we could define a StringPreParser like this
StringPreParser doParsing(str, which) { if(str.toLower.find(\'shit\')) {
\"If you\'re going to use language like that I shall ignoreyou! \";
return nil; } return str; } ; We can have as many StringPreParsers as we
like in our game, and the player\'s input will be processed by each in
turn (unless one of them returns nil, in which case processing of the
player\'s command will stop there). We can control the order in which
StringPreParsers are used by means of their \`runOrder\` property. For
more details, look up StringPreParser in the \*Library Reference
Manual\*. \### 19.2.2. Object Resolution The adv3Lite library can
understand a reasonable range of noun phrases as referring to a
particular object: zero or more adjectives followed by a noun, or a pair
of nouns separated by \'of\', or a noun followed by a number, or a
locational phrase like \"the ball on the table\", and its parser isn\'t
fussy about word order, making it easy to match noun phrases like
\'Cranky the Clown\' or \'S and P Magazine\'. We\'ve also seen that we
can bracket selected words in the \`vocab\` property of an object to
make them weak tokens, which can\'t then match the object on their own
(but only in conjunction with other tokens that are not weak). If the
order of words is important, or you want an item to match a particular
phrase but not necessarily the individual words that make up that
phrase, you can use the \`matchPhrases\` property to define one or more
phrases you want the object to match; this can be defined as a
single-quoted string or as list of single-quoted strings. For example,
suppose we have a game that contains both a red wine bottle and a red
bottle. The phrase \'red bottle\' is then ambiguous, and it\'s not easy
to see how the player could refer to the red bottle as distinct from the
red wine bottle. One way to handle this would be to define the
\`matchPhrases\` property on the red wine bottle: redWineBottle: Thing
\'red wine bottle; glass\' matchPhrases = \[\'red wine\', \'wine\'\];
redBottle: Thing \'red bottle; glass\' ; The \`redWineBottle\` object
will now match \'red wine bottle\' or \'wine bottle\' but not \'red
bottle\'. Note that the \`matchPhrases\` property doesn\'t add any vocab
to an object; it just restricts the circumstances under which its
existing vocab words will match. Note also that we need to list \'wine\'
in the \`matchPhrases\` list, since the presence of \'red wine\' in the
list would otherwise not allow \'wine\' to match by itself. If this
still don\'t give us enough control over which objects are matched, we
can override \`matchNameCommon()\` on the object in question (roughly
speaking, this is the equivalent of an Inform 6 \`parse_name\` routine).
For details of how to do this, look up \`matchNameCommon()\` (defined on
\`Mentionable\`) in the \*Library Reference Manual\*. A slightly
different situation is where the player is well aware (or ought to be
well aware) of a number of objects that could match what s/he types, but
is more likely to mean one thing than another. For example, suppose that
the player character is carrying around a red book and a blue book, each
of which she\'s likely to need to consult quite frequently. Since \`x
book\` won\'t select between the books, the player is quite likely to
type \`x red\` to refer to the red book. On occasion, there may well be
other red objects in scope, but in this scenario it\'s still more likely
that \`red\` by itself is intended to refer to the red book, so it will
be most helpful to the player if we can nudge the parser towards
preferring the red book to other red objects (other things being equal)
while telling the player what choice the parser has made in cases of
potential ambiguity. For this purpose we can use the \`vocabLikelihood\`
property; the default value is 0, so we could give the red book a
\`vocabLikelihood\` of 10, say, to make the parser prefer it in cases of
ambiguity it couldn\'t resolve in any other way. For further details,
look up \`vocabLikehood\` (defined on \`Thing\`) in the \*Library
Reference Manual\*. For even finer-grained control you could override
\`scoreObject()\` on a particular Thing or class; again, for further
details, consult the Library Reference Manual. The techniques outlined
above all presuppose that we\'re happy with the parser\'s idea of scope
(since the parser will only match objects it considers to be in scope
for the current command). In slightly simplified terms, scope defines
what objects the player character can actually interact with for a given
command; normally this will be the objects the player character can see
(or perhaps sense in some other way), the main exception being that we
can obviously talk, read or think about things without being able to see
them. The vast majority of the time, the parser\'s idea of scope will do
what we want, but every now and again we may want something different.
There are various ways of adjusting scope in adv3Lite. The most
fundamental is probably the \`addExtraScopeItems(role)\` method of a
particular action; by default this simply calls
addExtraScopeItems(action)\` on the actor\'s current room (which thus
provides another opportunity to affect scope), which in turn calls
\`addExtraScopeItems()\` on all the regions that room is in. By default
the methods on Room and Region simply add to scope any objects that are
in the Room or Region\'s \`extraScopeItems\` list. For example, the GoTo
Action, which allows the player character to travel to the location of
any known room or object with a \`go to wherever\` command defines its
\`addExtraScopeItems\` method like this: /\* Add all known items to
scope \*/ addExtraScopeItems(whichRole?) { scopeList =
scopeList.appendUnique(Q.knownScopeList); } \## 19.3. Similarity,
Disambiguation and Difference One of the things no player of our game
wants to see is a disambiguation disaster like this: \>take mat\`Which
mat do you mean, the mat, the mat or the mat? We should normally be able
to avoid this sort of thing by ensuring that we give each object a
unique name property, in this case perhaps \'rubber mat\', \'beer mat\'
and \'place mat\', but there may be cases where we don\'t want to do
this, perhaps because the full distinctive name of the object would seem
too cumbersome for use in inventory listings and the like (perhaps our
game contains a large black decorative door mat, a medium-sized black
decorative door mat and a large brown decorative door mat). In such
cases we can instead define the \`disambigName\` property to contain a
uniquely distinctive name. Then the regular name will be used in
inventory and room listings, while the \`disambigName\` will be used in
disambiguation prompts like the one above. If we do define a
\`disambigName\` we should be careful to ensure that it does actually
provide a combination of words that identifies each object uniquely, and
that this combination of words will match the \`vocab\` property of the
object. If we want we can define the order in which items are listed in
a disambiguation prompt using the \`disambigOrder\` property, which by
default takes its value from the \`listOrder\` property. This can be
useful when items are explicitly enumerated, or otherwise have some
natural order, e.g.: \>open drawer\`Which drawer you mean: the top
drawer, the middle drawer or the bottom drawer? For further details,
look up these properties in the \*Library Reference Manual\*. Some
objects may be genuinely indistinguishable, at least for the purposes of
our game. One pound coin or silver dollar is much like another. Adv3Lite
treats items as effectively indistinguishable if they have the same
names and can be referred to by the same vocab. So, for example, to
define a bowl containing five identical grapes we might write: class
Grape: Food \'grape; green round; fruit\[pl\]\' \'grape\' \"It\'s round
and green. \" ; bowl: Container \'bowl\' ; + Grape; + Grape; + Grape; +
Grape; + Grape; Then we\'ll see the bowl described as containing five
grapes (rather than \"a grape, a grape, a grape, a grape and a grape\"),
and players will be able to issue commands like \`take a grape\` without
the parser bothering them with a disambiguation prompt. One thing to
watch out for with equivalent objects is irregular plurals. The adv3Lite
library knows about most of the common ones already, but if for some
reason your game objects include several pericopae (singular pericope),
you would stipulate this uncommon plural in braces immediately after the
singular form: pericope: Thing \'short pericope{pericopae} ; brief\' ;
Similarly, if your game featured alien insects called mantikae (singular
mantika) you could just include the plural suffix in curly braces:
mantika: Thing \'black mantika{-e} ; alien; insect\' ; Even when objects
are equivalent in this sense, the parser can distinguish them in some
cases; for example the player could refer to \"a grape in the bowl\" or
\"the grape on the table\" even when the grapes are otherwise identical.
Before the parser distinguishes by location, it tries to distinguish by
ownership. This can be defined explicitly by setting the \`owner\`
property (so that, for example, Bob\'s wallet remains Bob\'s wallet even
if Nancy steals it), or implicitly by location, (so that, for example, a
pen in Bob\'s inventory can be referred to as Bob\'s pen if it\'s not
explicitly owned by anyone else). For more details look up the
\`owner\`, \`nominalOwner() \`and\` ownsContents\` properties on Thing
in the \*Library Reference Manual\*. We have seen how identically-named
objects are automatically grouped together by adv3Lite. It can also
happen that similarly-named objects are arranged in a class hierarchy,
so that, for example, we have a Coin class from which the GoldCoin and
SilverCoin classes inherit. In such cases we can, if we like, inherit
part of the vocab and/or name. For example, a + sign in the name part of
a vocab string indicates that the name part of the superclass is to be
inserted at that point; for example: class Coin: Thing \'coin; round
metal\' ; class GoldCoin: Coin \'gold +\'; class SilverCoin: Coin
\'silver +\' ; smallSilverCoin:SilverCoin \'small +\'; In this case, the
GoldCoin and SilverCoin classes have name properties of \'gold coin\'
and \'silver coin\' respectively, while the smallSilverCoin\'s name will
be initialized to \'small silver coin\'. In addition, all these classes
and objects will inherited the adjectives \'round\' and \'metal\' from
the Coin class. If we don\'t want adjectives to be inherited from a
parent class, we can start the adjectives section of the vocab property
with a minus sign, like so: squarePlasticCoin: Coin \' square plastic
+; - blue\'; \## 19.4. Fancier Output We have already seen how we can
use HTML tags to format the output of a game; for example \"**\...**\"
to display text in bold, or \"\...\" to display text in red. But
HTML-TADS can do a great deal more than that; in addition to the other
things we can do with HTML mark-up we can display pictures and play
sound. For details see the \*Introduction to HTML TADS\*. If you want to
use any of these fancy output features (HTML mark-up, sound, and
graphics) you need to be aware that not all TADS 3 interpreters may be
able to handle them (especially the TADS 3 interpreters available on
non-Windows systems). Your game therefore needs to test the capabilities
of the interpreter it\'s running on and provide some suitable
alternative for features a less capable interpreter cannot support. For
example, if your game displays a picture in response to an \`examine
\`command, it should also display a textual description on interpreters
that can\'t cope with graphics. To determine what features the
interpreter your game is running on can support you can use the
\`systemInfo()\` function, which is fully described in the \"tads-io
Function Set\" chapter in Part IV of the \*System Manual\*. Amongst
other things the library changes two successive dashes into an en-dash
and three into an em-dash. This is great for producing nice-looking
textual output, but can be problematic if we actually want to see a run
of dashes (for example, because we\'re trying to display some kind of
diagram). The place where the library converts runs of dashes is the
\`typographicalOutputFilter,\` so if we need to disable this behaviour
from time to time to draw our diagrams, we can override it thus: modify
typographicalOutputFilter isActive = true activate() { isActive = true;
} deactivate { isActive = nil; } filterText(ostr, val) { return isActive
? inherited(ostr, val) :val; } ; The we can call
\`typographicalOutputFilter.deactivate()\` before outputting our
dash-using diagram and \`typographicalOutputFilter.activate()\`
afterwards. Depending on the context we may also need to call
\`gTranscript.deactivate() \`and \`gTranscript.activate() \`before and
after outputting our diagram. \## 19.5. Changing Person, Tense, and
Player Character Interactive Fiction is normally narrated in the second
person singular and the present tense: \"You are carrying a spade, a
compass, and an old brown sack\" or \"You see nothing of interest in the
old brown sack.\" But if we like we can change both the person and the
tense. In addition to second-person narration, adv3iLte allows narration
in either the first person (\"I see nothing of interest in the old brown
sack\") or the third (\"Martha sees nothing of interest in the old brown
sack\"). It\'s also possible to write a game in the past tense (\"You
saw nothing of interest in the old brown sack\"), or partly in the
present and partly in the past (perhaps using the latter for
flashbacks); or, indeed, in any of four other tenses (perfect, past
perfect, future and future perfect), though these will probably be less
commonly used. To change to first-person or third-person narration is
fairly straightforward; we just need to override the \`person\` property
on the player character object (typically called \`me\`). The default
value is \`2\`; for first-person narration we simply change it to \`1\`,
and for third-person narration we change it to \`3\`. If we are using
third-person narration there\'s one more step we need to take: we need
to give the player character object a name by which he or she will be
referred to, for example: me: Actor \'Martha; ; woman; her\' person = 3
; If we have written all our own action response messages in the form
\"{I} turn{s/ed} the handle\" rather than \"You turn the handle\", then
they will automatically adapt to whichever person and tense we use; we
could even switch between first, second and third-person narration in
the course of the game and all our messages would automatically adapt.
This is one reason why it\'s a good idea to get into the habit of
writing all our message using parameter substitution strings; if we do
that and then decide half way through the game that our seemingly cool
idea for third-person narrative isn\'t working out so well after all,
all we have to do is to change \`person\`; if we hadn\'t used parameter
substitutions we\'d also have to go back and change all our custom
messages by hand. Changing tense is also reasonably easy. If we want to
narrate our entire game in the past tense then all we need to do is to
override \`gameMain.usePastTense\` to true (which will take care of all
the library messages) and then write all our own text in the past tense.
If we want to switch tenses during the course of our game, then it will
have been as well to use parameter substitutions for all our custom
messages so that they\'ll change tense automatically too. Then we can
change tense by changing the value of \`gameMain.usePastTense\` between
nil and true, or, if we want to use one of the more exotic tenses, by
changing the value of \`Narrator.tense\` (but if we do that once, we
must keep on doing it rather than relying on \`gameMain.usePastTense\`).
If we\'re only changing between past and present (the most likely
combination) we can also use the tSel() macro or a vertical bar in a
message parameter substitution to write text that changes text
accordingly. The following two strings, illustrating the use of these
two methods, are effectively equivalent: \"There \<\> absolutely nothing
\<\>. \"; \"There {is\|was} absolutely nothing {here\|there} . \"; If we
want to change player character during the course of a game, we can do
this simply with the \`setPlayer(actor)\` function. For example, if we
start out with \`me\` as the player character, and later want to switch
to Mary as the player character, we can just call \`setPlayer(mary)\`;
we could subsequently call \`setPlayer(me)\` to switch back to the
original player character. Actually, we probably need to do a \*bit\*
more than that, since while \`setPlayer()\` indeed changes the player
character, it doesn\'t give any indication to the player that it has
done so, so at the very least, we might want to display some text
informing the player about the switch; it would probably be a good idea
to look around from the perspective of the new player character too,
e.g.: setPlayer(mary); \"All of a sudden, you find you are Mary!\\b\";
mary.getOutermostRoom.lookAroundWithin(); Something else we can do is to
add an indication in the status line that the player character has
changed; that\'s often done by adding \" (as so-and-so)\" after the room
name. We can achieve that with the following modification to Room:
modify Room statusName(actor) { inherited(actor);
if(libGlobal.playerCharName != nil) \" (as \<\>) \"; } ; We have to use
\`libGlobal.playerCharName\` rather than just \`actor.theName\` here
otherwise we\'d just see \"(as you)\" in the status line, which
wouldn\'t be particularly informative. One other thing we need to take
care of once we start swapping the player character around is the way
the actor object in question is described when it\'s the player
character, and when it\'s an NPC (as it will be if the player character
encounters it when the player character is someone else). If an Actor
can switch between being the player character and an NPC, when we need
to use its \`isPlayerChar\` property to adjust its description between
perspectives accordingly, for example: bob: Actor \'Bob; tall gangling;
man fellow; him\' \"\<\>You\'re a tall man, and not bad-looking, though
you say it yourself. \<\>He\'s a gangling sort of fellow whorather
fancies himself. \<\>\" person = 2 ; Note that even if Bob starts out by
being the player character, if he may later become an NPC you need to
make him an Actor and define his \`vocab\` property in a way that will
be suitable for his future role as an NPC. \## 19.6. Pathfinding
Adv3Lite comes with a built-in pathfinding module. We have already seen
how to use it to calculate a route for an NPC to take from his/her
current location to any given destination (provided a viable route
exists), using \`routeFinder.findPath(start, destination)\`. For a full
discussion, see section\[ 14.12 \]()above. The default behaviour of the
\`routeFinder\` object is to exclude any route that passes through a
locked door (on the basis that an NPC would probably be unable to
navigate it). To change that assumption you can set
\`routeFinder.excludeLockedDoors\` to nil. There\'s also a
\`pcRouteFinder\` object that can be used to help the player character
navigate the map using \`go to\` and \`continue\` commands. The
difference between this and the \`routeFinder\` is that it will only
find routes to places (or objects) the player character already knows
about via TravelConnectors the destinations of which are already known
to the player character. This prevents players from using the
route-finder to avoid the need to explore the map. However, if there\'s
an area of the map that should be familiar to the player character at
the start of the game (such as her own house or his home town), then you
can define that area as a \`Region\` and then define \`familiar =true\`
on that Region. The player will then be able to navigate the familiar
region with \`go to \`and\` continue \`without first having to explore
it. Beyond that, there\'s nothing more you need to do to make this form
of player navigation work; it\'s built in as standard. For example, the
player can enter the command \`go to kitchen \`to take the first step
towards the kitchen, and then on subsequent turns enter the command
\`continue \`or just \`c \`to keep taking the next step until the player
character arrives at the destination. This mechanism allows the player
to stop along the route to interact with anything that turns up, and
then continue the journey if and when appropriate. If you want to
disable this kind of navigation for the player, the simplest thing to do
is simply to exclude pathfind.t from your build. If, however, you need
to include pathfind.t either because you want to use the \`routeFinder\`
for NPCs or because you only want to disable the \`go to\` command under
particular circumstances, you could use a Doer: Doer \'go to Thing\'
execAction(c) { \"In this game, you\'ll have to navigate with
compassdirections. \"; abort; } ; Both \`routeFinder\` and
\`pcRouteFinder\` are designed to find routes around a game map. They
both, however, inherit from the more abstract \`Pathfinder\` class which
could in principle be used as the basis for other types of path-finding.
To to this you would need to define your own object of the
\`Pathfinder\` class and define its \`findDestinations(cur)\` method to
find all the destinations one step away from \*cur\*, where \*cur\*
represents a particular step along the path, which would be given as a
two element list, the second element of which is the node to which it
leads and the first element defines how to get to this node from the
previous one. To explain how to go about this in any more depth is way
beyond the scope of this book, but the place to start would be to
examine how \`routeFinder\` and \`pcRouteFinder\` implement this method.
\## 19.7. Coding Excursus 18 Although we\'ve covered most of the coding
topics needed for most of what you\'re likely to need to do in TADS 3,
and although you can always find out about the rest by reading the
\*TADS 3 System Manual\*, there\'s a couple more topics we should
mention, if only to point out which other parts of the \*System Manual\*
are most worth studying. \### 19.7.1. Varying, Optional and Named
Argument Lists We talked about defining methods and functions very early
on, but one thing we didn\'t mention is that both methods and functions
can be defined to take a variable number of arguments. There are two
ways to define such a function or method. We can either write:
myFunc(someArg, \...) { /\* code \*/ } Or else myFunc(someArg, \[args\])
{ /\* code \*/ } Here either the ellipis (\...) or the \[args\]
parameter can be replaced with any number of arguments (including none)
when this function is called, so that any of the following would be
legal ways of calling \`myFunc()\`: myFunc(2); myFunc(2, \'foobar\');
myFunc(2, me, 3, \'ridiculous-looking pants\'); And indeed, many other
variants besides. If we use the ellipsis notation, then to obtain the
values of the arguments within the function or method we must use the
\`getArg(n)\` function, where \*n\* is the number of the argument we
want to manipulate. The number of arguments is then \`argcount\`. For
example, with the third call to \`myFunc()\` in the above example,
\`argcount\` would be 4, \`getArg(1)\` would be 2, \`getArg(2)\` would
be \`me\`, \`getArg(3)\` would be 3, and \`getArg(4)\` would be
\'ridiculous looking pants\'. If we use the second form, with
\`\[args\]\` in place of the ellipsis (we can use any name here, it
doesn\'t have to be \'args\'), then we can obtain the variable arguments
directly by looking at the \`args\` list within the function (or
method); for example in the same example \`arg\[1\] \`would be me,
\`arg\[2\]\` would be 3, and \`arg\[3\]\` would be \'ridiculous looking
pants\'. We can use any number of fixed parameters (like \`someArg\` in
the above example) before the ellipsis or list notation, including no
fixed parameters at all. We can also \*send\* a list value to a function
or method, as though the list were a series of individual argument
values. To do this, place an ellipsis after the list argument value in
the function or method call\'s argument list: local lst = \[me, 3,
\'sensible-looking shirt\'\]; myFunc(2, lst\...); This passes four
arguments to \`myFunc(),\` not two. For a fuller (and probably clearer)
explanation of this, see the sections on \"Varying parameter lists\" and
\"Varying-argument calls\" in the chapter on \"Procedural Code\" in Part
III of the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. A related but not identical case is
where we want a function or method to have optional parameters. A
varying argument list is one in which there can be any number of
parameters. With optional parameters, on the other hand, the number of
parameters is fixed, but some of them can be omitted when the method or
function is called. This can be particularly useful for parameters that
usually take a default value or which are commonly not used. We define
an optional parameter by following it with a question-mark (?) in the
argument list, for example: truncate(str, len, upperCase?) { str =
str.substr(1, len); if(upperCase) str = str.toUpper(); return str; }
This returns a string that is \`str\` truncated to the first \*len\*
characters and optionally converted to upper case. If we don\'t want to
convert the string to upper case, we needn\'t supply the third parameter
at all; the function could simply be called as: msg = truncate(\'The
rain in Spain stays mainly in the plain\', 16); If an optional parameter
is not used in a function or method call, its value at the start of the
function or method is nil. If we want it to default to some other value,
we can initialize it by following it with = plus the required default
value, e.g.: increment(x, y = 1) return x + y; ; If this is called as
\`increment(2)\` it will return 3; if it is called as
\`increment(2,2)\`, it will return 4. The above examples have mixed
compulsory and optional parameters. It\'s also perfectly legal to have a
function or method with only optional parameters (and no compulsory
ones), but where there is a mix of compulsory and optional parameters,
the compulsory ones must come first. For the full story on optional
parameters see the chapter on \'Optional Parameters\' in Part III of the
\*TADS 3 System Manual\*. A final variation on the kinds of argument
list we can create is \*named arguments\*. This allows an argument to be
passed by name instead of positionally. We indicate a names argument by
following its name with a colon. For example we could write:
truncate(str:, len:, upperCase:?){ str = str.substr(1, len);
if(upperCase) str = str.toUpper(); return str; } Since the arguments are
named, they don\'t need be listed in the same order when the function or
method is called. For example, we could call the above function with:
local msg = truncate(len:6, upperCase: true, str: \'oranges and
lemons\'); For the full story on named arguments see the chapter on
\'Named Arguments\' in Part III of the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. \###
19.7.2. Regular Expressions It\'s possible to do quite a bit of string
manipulation and matching with the ordinary string methods, such as
\`find()\` and \`findReplace()\`, and for certain purposes these can be
fine. For example, if we need to check whether the player\'s command
includes the name \'Nathaniel Weatherspoon\' and replace it with
\'nate\' we can perfectly well convert it to lower case and use the
\`find()\` method, e.g. StringPreParser(str, which) doParsing(str,
which) { if(str.toLower.find(\'nathaniel weatherspoon\')) str =
str.toLower.findReplace(\'nathaniel weatherspoon\',\'nate\', ReplacAll);
return str; } ; In more complex cases we may soon run up against the
limitations of this method, however. For example, if we wanted to test
whether the player\'s command contained any of the prepositions \'at\',
\'in\', \'on\', or \'by\', this would be much trickier, since we should
not only need to look for each of them individually, but also check that
they were occurring as a word in their own right, and not as part of
some other word, such as \'attack\' or \'indecent\' or \'honest\' or
\'ruby\'; simply surrounding them with spaces wouldn\'t work either,
since them we\'d miss any of these words if the occurred right at the
end beginning of the end of the string we were testing (\'he wanted to
pass them by\' or \'on the table is a brass bell\'). For this kind of
case we\'re really far better off searching with the aid of a regular
expression such as: rexSearch(\'%\<(at\|in\|on\|by)%\>\', str); This
will test whether any of \'at\', \'in\', \'on\' or \'by\' occur as
separate words in \`str\`, without worrying about whether they\'re in
upper or lower case. At first sight, regular expressions look
horrifyingly confusing creatures. At second and third sight, they\'re
merely confusing (if we\'re not used to them). But if we plan to do a
significant amount of string manipulation they\'re worth getting to
grips with sooner or later. To find out about them, read the \"Regular
Expressions\" chapter in Part IV of the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. Then
read it again, and expect to have to refer to it frequently until you
become \*very\* familiar with regular expressions. And when you start
using regular expressions in your own code, start simple and don\'t be
too disheartened if your first efforts don\'t quite work as you expect.
In the long term it \*is\* worth getting to grips with these beasties.
\### 19.7.3. LookupTable There\'s one other class we\'ll briefly mention
here, the \`LookupTable\`. This can be used like a list or Vector,
except that we can index it on any kind of value. We create a new
LookupTable in much the same way as we create a new Vector: myTab = new
LookupTable(); Once the LookupTable has been created we can store and
retrieve values in and from it using arbitrary keys, for example:
myTab\[\'villain\'\] = bob; myTab\[bob\] = myrtle; myTab\[\[myrtle,
\'mood\'\]\] = \'sad\'; We can then retrieve these values with: local v1
= myTab\[\'villain\'\]; local v2 = myTab\[bob\]; local v3 =
myTab\[\[myrtle, \'mood\'\]\]; Following which v1, v2 and v3 would be
bob, myrtle and \'sad\' respectively. If we try to assign a value to a
key that already exists, we\'ll simply override the key-value pair with
a new one. If we try to retrieve a value for a key that hasn\'t been
defined, we\'ll get the value nil. For more details, see the chapter on
LookupTable in Part IV of the \*TADS 3 System Manual.\* \### 19.7.4.
Multi-Methods TADS 3 also has a feature called \"multi-methods.\" This
implements a relatively new object-oriented programming technique known
as multiple dispatch, in which the types of \*multiple\* arguments can
be used to determine which of several possible functions to call. The
traditional TADS method call uses a \*single-dispatch\* system: when we
write \`x.foo(3)\`, we\'re invoking the method foo as defined on the
object x, or as inherited from the nearest superclass of x that defines
that method. This is known as single dispatch because a single value (x)
controls the selection of which definition of foo will be invoked.
Multiple dispatch extends this notion so that multiple values can be
considered when selecting which method to invoke. For example, we could
write one version of a function \`putIn()\` that operates on a Thing and
a Container, and another version of the same function that operates on a
Liquid and a Vessel, and the system will automatically choose the
correct version at run-time based on the types of \*both\* arguments;
e.g. (leaving a lot to the imagination): putIn(Thing obj, Container
cont) { obj.moveInto(cont); \"{I} {put} \<\> into \<\>\"; } putIn(Liquid
liq, Vessel ves) { local blk = liq.bulk; liq.bulk -= ves.getFreeBulk();
if(liq.bulk \<= 0) liq.moveInto(nil); vess.addLiquid(liq, blk); \"{I}
pour{s/ed} \<\> into \<\>.\"; } For more details, see the chapter on
Multi-Methods in Part III of the \*System Manual\*. \### 19.7.5.
Modifying Code at Run-Time Not only can we change the data held in a
property at run-time (we\'d hardly be able to do much in TADS 3 if we
couldn\'t), we can also change the code attached to methods. That is, we
can assign a new method to an object property (and also retrieve the
method that\'s attached to a property for use elsewhere). We do this
using the methods \`getMethod(prop)\` and \`setMethod(prop,meth)\`,
which we encountered earlier in relation to double-quoted strings. For
the full story on these two methods see the chapter on TadsObject in
Part IV of the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. In order to be able to do more
than copy a method from one object property and apply it to another, we
need some means of defining a method which can later be attached to a
property. This can be done either as a \*floating method\* or as an
\*anonymous method\*. A \*floating method\* is so called because it
doesn\'t belong to any particular object. We can create it using the
keyword \`method\` in much the same way that we create a function. For
example: method describeMe{ if(ofKind(NonPortable)) \"\\\^\<\> is not
the sort of thing you couldcarry around with you. \"; else \"It looks
small enough to be carried. \"; } This method could then be attached to,
say, the desc property of an object using a statement like:
ballBearing.setMethod(&desc, describeMe); An anonymous method is created
in a way similar to that in which we\'d create an anonymous function,
for example: local meth = method(obj, newCont) { gMessageParams(obj,
newCont); if(obj.bulk \> maxBulk) { \"{The subj obj} {is} too big to fit
into {the newCont} . \"; exit; } else \"{The subj onj} {is} being
inserted into {the newCont} . \"; } blackBox.setMethod(&notifyInsert,
meth); Note that in both cases the floating or anonymous method takes on
the context of the object to which it\'s attached by \`setMethod\`. That
is, the floating or anonymous method can refer to \`self\` and to
methods and properties of the self object (and can use keywords such as
\`inherited\` and \`delegated\`) and this will all work as expected in
the context of the object to which the anonymous/floating method has
been attached. We\'ve already seen an example of this, where the library
defines a CustomRoomLister class allows prefix and suffix \*methods\* to
be passed via its constructor: class CustomRoomLister: ItemLister /\* is
the object listed in a LOOK AROUND description? \*/ listed(obj) { return
obj.lookListed && !obj.isHidden; } /\* \* In the simple form of the
constructor, we just supply astring that \* will form the prefix string
for the lister. In the moresophisticated \* form we can supply an
additional argument that\'s ananonymous method or \* function that\'s
used to show the list prefix or suffix, orelse just \* the suffix
string. \*/ construct(prefix, prefixMethod:?, suffix:?, suffixMethod:?)
{ prefix\_ = prefix; if(prefixMethod != nil) setMethod(&showListPrefix,
prefixMethod); if(suffix != nil) suffix\_ = suffix; if(suffixMethod !=
nil) setMethod(&showListSuffix, suffixMethod); } prefix\_ = nil suffix\_
= \'. \' showListPrefix(lst, pl, irName) { \"\<.p\>\<\> \"; }
showListSuffix(lst, pl, irName) { \"\<\>\"; } showSubListing =
(gameMain.useParentheticalListing); We could then pass the methods we
want to use when we create the lister, for example: longPath: Room
\'Path\' \"This long path goes nowhere in particular. There\'s a market
justto the west. \<\>As paths go it\'s fairlyfutile.\<\> There\'s a
field to the east. \" east = field west = startroom
remoteRoomContentsLister(other) { return new CustRoomLister(nil,
prefixMethod: method(lst, pl, irName) { \"Lying around \<\>
\<\>are\<\>is\<\> \"; } ); } ; The above example incidentally shows that
an anonymous method can be declared on the fly within a method or
function call, just like an anonymous function. For further details see
the section on \'Floating Methods\' in the chapter on \'Procedural
Code\', and the section on \'Anonymous Methods\' in the chapter on
\'Anonymous Functions\', both in Part III of the \*Tads 3 System
Manual\*. If anonymous and floating methods don\'t give you enough
flexibility, you can go a step or two further with \*DynamicFunc\*. The
DynamicFunc class lets you compile a string expression into executable
code at run-time (specifically, into a function which you can then
call). This string could, of course, be one that has been dynamically
created elsewhere in your code, allowing a TADS 3 game to write some of
its own source code and then compile it. For details, see the chapter on
\'DynamicFunc\' in Part IV of the \*TADS 3 System Manual.\* \## 19.8.
Compiling for Web-Based Play Full instructions for compiling and
deploying a TADS 3 for playing on the web are given in Section VII of
the \*TADS 3 System Manual\* (\'Playing on the Web\'), and the
instructions specific to adv3Lite can be found in the \*adv3Lite Library
Manual\*, so they need not be repeated here. A few points may be noted
in passing, however. First, a web-based game cannot use the Banner API
(although it can display a standard interpreter layout with a status
line). So, if your game needs the Banner API, you\'ll have to compile
and deploy it in the normal way (although to date, few if any published
TADS 3 games have made much use of the Banner API). On the other hand a
web-based game has full access to the features of the browser on which
it\'s played, including Javascript, CSS and HTML DOM, which are not
available through the standard HTML-TADS interpreter. This potentially
allows a game author a great deal \*more\* control over the interface
presented to players. Second, if you wish to use the standard
interpreter layout with just a status line and scrolling play area,
it\'s pretty straightforward to write a TADS 3 game which can then be
compiled in two versions, for playing via a traditional interpreter
\*and\* for playing via the web. To do this, it\'s probably easiest to
develop and test the traditional interpreter-based version first, and
then compile and deploy the web version once you\'re done (which just
requires a few manual tweaks to the .t3m file). Third, although there
are very few compatibility issues when switching between the web and
traditional versions of a TADS 3 game that uses the standard interface
layout, there are one or two. The first is that the tag can\'t be used
in the web-based version, which almost certainly renders the entire
setAboutBox() method redundant in the web version. Perhaps the easiest
way to deal with this in a game intended for both traditional and
web-based play is to surround your setAboutBox statement with #ifdef
\... #endif conditional compilation statements thus: gameMain:
GameMainDef #ifndef TADS_INCLUDE_NET setAboutBox() { \" **\<\>**\\b
\<\>\\bVersion \<\>\\b **\<\>** \"; } #endif \...; Actually, this is not
strictly necessary in this case, since \`gameMain.setAboutBox()\` will
never be called from a game compiled for the web interface, and so
leaving it in would almost certainly be harmless. There may, however, be
other parts of our code that we want to work differently in the web
based and traditional interpreter-based versions, and this illustrates
what is probably the neatest way of handling it. Another compatibility
issue you may run into is if the traditional version of your game uses
an identifier that\'s used for a different purpose in the web-ui
library. For example, an early version of the web-ui library used
\'path\' as the name of a property. Using \'path\' as the name of an
object (a room representing a path, perhaps) in game code then resulted
in series of error messages the game was compiled for the web version,
even though the game worked fine in the traditional version. The
solution was to change the name of the offending identifier (in the case
of \'path\' we might change it to \'longPath\' for example) and then do
a full recompile for debugging. A full recompile for debugging may in
any case be necessary when switching between the traditional and
web-based versions of the same game. (Note, by the time you read this
the web-ui libraries may have been changed to avoid the clash with the
identifier name \'path\', so you may not encounter this particular
incompatibility). \[« Go to previous
chapter\](18-menus-hints-and-scoring.html)    \[Return to table of
contents\](LearningT3Lite.html)    \[Go to next chapter
»\](20-where-to-go-from-here.html)
