\-\-- layout: article title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../ styleType: article \-\-- \# 20. Where To Go From Here
If you\'ve followed \*Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite\* this far, you\'re
well on your way to knowing all you need to know to write your own games
in TADS 3 using the adv3Lite library. \"Knowing all you need to know\"
is not, however, the same thing as committing the entire contents of
this manual to memory, let alone knowing all the ins and outs of every
nook and cranny of the TADS 3 language and adv3Lite library; there\'s
probably no one in the known universe who has \*that \*kind of knowledge
in their head. Knowing what you need to know is rather knowing enough to
carry out the tasks you commonly carry out in TADS 3/adv3Lite with ease,
gradually becoming familiar with the not-quite-so common features as you
get to use them more, and knowing where to look up the rest as and when
you need it. Even if you\'ve managed to master the contents of this
manual pretty thoroughly, sooner rather than later you\'ll come up
against something you want to do that it doesn\'t cover. Just what this
is will be different for every reader; it\'s what your game does that
\*isn\'t\* typical that\'s likely to make it interesting, and no manual
can hope to cover all the \*atypical\* things game authors might like to
do with TADS 3/adv3Lite. The next step (which you needn\'t take straight
away) is probably to read through the \*adv3Lite Library Manual\* and
the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*, or at least to skim them so you get a
rough idea of what they contain so you can find it when you need it. At
some point, again probably sooner rather than later, you are going to
find that there is going to be no substitute for delving deep into the
\*Adv3Lite Library Reference Manual\* and trying to puzzle things out
for yourself. Although we\'ve tried to cover most of the most commonly
used properties and methods of the most commonly used classes, it\'s not
possible to try to cover everything here without making this manual so
vast and dense that nobody could ever read it (or write it!). In any
case, as soon as you start moving beyond the basics it\'s probably a
good idea to start browsing the \*Library Reference Manual\* to read
more about the classes, objects and functions you may be interested in.
Almost however long you\'ve been working with TADS 3 you\'ll probably
discover something new! If you have a multi-tabbed web browser, it\'s a
good idea to have the main parts of the TADS 3 documentation set
(\*System Manual\*, \*adv3Lite Library Manual\* and \*Library Reference
Manual\*) open in separate tabs whenever you start working with TADS 3,
so that they\'re instantly available when you need to look things up
(which you will need to do \-- frequently). Indeed, it\'s often useful
to have the \*Library Reference Manual\* open in several tabs at once
for when you want to jump round the library while keeping track of where
you\'ve jumped from. Another technique you can use if you\'re using
Workbench is to set break-points in the debugger and step through the
code to see what\'s happening, though at some points this may well feel
more confusing than helpful, especially at first! One final piece of
advice: if you come up against something that you\'re absolutely stuck
on, go away and try something else. Whether you\'re still learning TADS
3 or reasonably adept at it, you\'ll occasionally come up against things
that seem just too hard or too complicated, but which later yield to
renewed efforts once you come back to them in the light of greater
experience. This manual has taken about you as far as an introductory
manual can. From now on the rest is up to you. In the meanwhile, if you
find any inaccuracies, typos, glaring omissions, or places where things
are unclear or could be improved, do let me know so that I can try to
put them right for a future edition. I can be emailed on
\[eric.eve@hmc.ox.ac.u\](mailto:eric.eve@hmc.ox.ac.uk)\[k\](mailto:eric.eve@ukf.net)
\[ \](mailto:eric.eve@hmc.ox.ac.uk) \[ . \](mailto:eric.eve@ukf.net)
\*Eric Eve\* \*Harris Manchester College, Oxford\* \*February 2014\* \[«
Go to previous chapter\](19-beyond-the-basics.html)    \[Return to table
of contents\](LearningT3Lite.html)    \[Go to next chapter
»\](21-alphabetical-index.html)
