\-\-- layout: article title: Learning TADS 3 with adv3Lite by Eric Eve
toroot: ../../../ styleType: article \-\-- \# 3. Putting Things on the
Map \## 3.1. The Root of All Things So far the maps we\'ve created have
been pretty dull, since they\'ve consisted purely of empty rooms. In a
real work of Interactive Fiction there\'d be all sorts of objects in the
rooms. Some of them would be portable objects the player can pick up and
take from place to place, some would be fixtures like doors, windows,
trees, houses and heavy furniture, and some would be mere decorations,
objects mentioned in the room description, which can be examined but
respond to any other kind of command by telling the player that they\'re
not important. The basic kind of object that\'s the ancestor of all
these kinds of thing is the \`Thing\`. We use the \`Thing\` class itself
for ordinary objects that the player can pick up and move around. A
typical definition of a \`Thing\` might look like: redBall: Thing vocab
= \'red ball; small red hard round cricket\' location = frontLawn desc =
\"It\'s quite small and hard; it looks much like a cricketball. \" ;
Since these three properties are so commonly used when defining
\`Things\` (virtually every \`Thing\` is likely to need them), it should
come as no surprise that there\'s a template that can be used when
defining \`Things\`. Using the template, the red ball could be defined
like this: redBall: Thing \'red ball; small red hard round cricket\'
\@frontLawn \"It\'s quite small and hard; it looks much like a cricket
ball.\" ; Study this example very carefully. It applies not only to
Thing but to every class that inherits from Thing, which is likely to
cover the vast majority of simulation objects defined in any adv3Lite
game. Even if you never get round to learning any other adv3Lite
template you should learn this one. You should become so familiar with
it that you have no difficulty recognizing at sight which property is
which when you see an object defined like this. (It also helps to be
just about equally familiar with the \`Room\` template, especially if
you plan on defining quite a number of rooms). We should now consider
each of these common properties in turn. \`vocab\` defines two things:
the short name of the object (in this case \'red ball\') and the words
the player can use to refer to the object in commands. In nearly every
case the former (the short name) will be subset of the latter (the words
the player can use to refer to the object), which is why we define both
together in the same property. The short name of the defines the name of
the object as it will appear in a room description or inventory listing,
e.g. \"You see a red ball here\" or \"You are carrying a red ball.\" We
start the \`vocab\` property by giving the short name followed by a
semicolon. Then we list all the other adjectives that might be used to
refer to the object. If there were any other nouns, we\'d then have
another semicolon followed by the list of the other nouns. We could also
have a third semicolon followed by the pronoun used to the refer to the
object, for example: redBall: Thing \'red ball; small red hard round
cricket; sphere; it\' \@frontLawn \"It\'s quite small and hard; it looks
much like a cricket ball.\"\` ; If we don\'t specify a pronoun the game
will assume it\'s \'it\', so we only need to specify a pronoun if it\'s
\'him\', \'her\' or \'them\'. The \`desc\` property defines the
description of the object that is displayed when the object is examined.
Note that unlike the \`vocab \`property, which use single quotes, the
\`desc\` property always uses double quotes (\"desc\"). The \`location\`
property defines where the object is at the start of play. For the time
being we\'ll stick to locating objects in rooms, although later on
we\'ll see other places they can go. Note that the \`location\` property
can \*only\* be used to define the initial location of an object.
\*Never\* try to move an object by changing its \`location\` property
directly. Call its \`moveInto(\*newloc\*) \`method instead, e.g.:
redBall.moveInto(backLawn); But to talk of methods is to get ahead of
ourselves. Instead we\'ll mention a second very common way of
stipulating the initial location of an object. Instead of defining its
location explicitly, either through setting \`location =wherever\` or by
using \`@wherever \`in the template, we can put it after the object
it\'s located in and precede it with a plus sign. For example:
frontLawn: OutdoorRoom \'Front Lawn\' \"The front lawn is a relatively
small expanse of grass. The somewhat larger back lawn lies to the south.
\" south = backLawn ; + redBall: Thing \'red ball; small red hard round
cricket\' \'red ball\' \"It\'s quite small and hard; it looks much like
a cricket ball.\" ; \*Exercise 3:\* Add some Things to one of the maps
you created earlier. Try running the resulting game; you should be able
to pick up these new objects and move them around. We should next look
at the \`vocab\` property in a bit more detail. While, in a sense, it\'s
one property \-- we can define it as a one single-quoted string \-- in
another sense it provides a means of defining several properties, making
it a compact and efficient tool for defining several of an object\'s
most commonly-needed properties all together at once. The basic
structure of the \`vocab\` property divides into four sections, each
divided from the next by a semicolon, which may be schematically
represented like so: \'name; adj adj adj; noun noun noun; pronoun\' That
is, the first section of the \`vocab\` property actually defines the
\`name\` property of the Thing we\'re defining (this holds good for
Rooms too, by the way). It also adds all the words it finds in the name
part into the Thing\'s \`vocabWords\` property so they can be used to
refer to the Thing we\'re defining. This means (a) that we (virtually)
never have to worry about the \`vocabWords\` property in our own code,
and (b) that we don\'t need to repeat any of the words in the Thing\'s
name in order to define the words that can be used to refer to it. The
second and third sections can then be used to add any additional
adjectives and nouns (respectively) that can be used to refer to this
thing. For example, if your game includes what American players would
call a \'flashlight\' and British users a \'torch\', it would be good to
include both nouns somewhere, as well as any adjectives used it its
description, for example: flashlight: Thing \'flashlight; heavy black
rubber; torch\' \"It\'s a heavy black rubber flashlight. \" ; The fourth
and final section can be used to define the pronoun (or pronouns) that
could be used to refer to the object. By default, the library will
assume this to be \'it\', which is likely to be correct for many if not
most of the objects you define. But some will be plural, and some may be
masculine or feminine, for example: trousers: Thing \'blue trousers; old
dark; pants; them\' \"They\'re your old dark blue trousers. \" ;
oldWoman: Thing \'old woman; handsome; ; she\' \"She may be quite old,
but she\'s quite handsome with it. \" ; The second of these definitions
incidentally illustrates that we can leave a section empty if we don\'t
need it; we just have a couple of semicolons together after the
adjective. Defining the pronoun at the end of the \`vocab\` property is
actually doing rather more than just defining what pronoun can be used;
it\'s in effect defining the gender and number of the object when it\'s
other than the default neuter singular (of course you could do that too
by defining an explicit \'it\' here, but there\'s no need to do that in
practice). We could define these properties explicitly by using the
\`isHim\`, \`isHer\` and \`plural\` properties of Thing, but (once you
get used to the idea) it\'s quicker and easier simply to add the
appropriate pronoun at the end of the \`vocab\` property. The
trousers/pants example raises another possibility, however, since we
might want to call this object a \'pair of trousers\' (or \'pair of
pants\'). Is this then singular or plural? The initial answer is
determined by what would be the correct form of the verb \'to be\'
following the name of this object in a sentence. In other words, would
we say \"The pair of trousers is blue\" or \"The pair of trousers are
blue\"? Most people would probably regard the former rather than the
latter as correct, so the trousers need to be singular, \'it\' rather
than \'them\'. On the other hand the player might well refer to the
pants/trousers as \'them\'. We might say, then, that such an object is
\*ambiguously plural\*, and we can indeed declare it as such by setting
its \`ambiguouslyPlural\` property to \`true\`. But once again we don\'t
need to do this explicitly; we can do it implicitly by including both
pronouns in the \`vocab\` property of the trousers object: trousers:
Thing \'pair of trousers; old dark blue; pants; it them\' \"They\'re
your old dark blue trousers. \" ; In this case the order of the pronouns
is significant: \'it\' comes first because the pair of trousers has to
be treated as grammatically singular when it forms the subject of a
sentence. Putting \'them\' second signals that we\'re regarding the pair
of trousers as grammatically singular, but ambiguously plural insofar as
the player can also refer to the trousers with the pronoun \'them\', in
such interchanges as: \>X TROUSERS \>They\'re your old dark blue
trousers. \>TAKE THEM \>Taken. Up until now we\'ve mentioned that there
are adjective and noun sections to the \`vocab \`property without really
explaining the significance of the distinction. In adv3Lite the parser
doesn\'t care about the order of words used to match an object (unless
you explicitly want it to, but that\'s a topic we\'ll leave till much
later), but it does care about parts of speech. In a nutshell, it
ignores articles (words like \'a\', \'an\', \'some\' and \'the\') treats
prepositions (\'to\', \'from\', \'with\', \'of\' or \'for\') as a
special case (see below) and prefers nouns to adjectives. That means if
we have one object called \'orange bowl\' and another called \'orange\'
(i.e. a piece of fruit), a command like TAKE ORANGE will be directed to
the fruit, not the bowl, since in the case of the fruit \'orange\' is a
noun, while in the case of the bowl it\'s only an adjective. How that
works in the adjectives and noun sections of the \`vocab\` property
should be reasonably obvious. Less obvious is how the library determines
the parts of speech of the words in the name section. What happens is
that the library assumes that every word except the last is an
adjective, and that the final word is a noun. If, however, the library
encounters a preposition in the name (e.g. \'large piece of rich
chocolate cake\') it assumes that the words before the preposition
constitute a noun phrase ending in a noun possibly preceded by one or
more adjectives (in this instance, for example, \'large piece\', so that
\'piece\' would be treated as a noun, while \'large\', \'rich\',
\'chocolate\' and \'cake\' would be treated as adjectives; \'cake\'
could be made a noun by immediately following it with \'\[n\]\'). Any
article immediately following a preposition is simply ignored (i.e. not
entered into the object\'s vocabulary), so that, for example, with a
name like \'west end of the hall\[n\]\', \'end\' and \'hall\' will be
entered as nouns, \'of\' as a preposition and \'the\' ignored. (The
reason the library treats every word in the name following a preposition
as an adjective, even if it looks like a noun, is that in phrases like
\'bottle of wine\' and \'key to the garage\', \'wine\' and \'garage\'
effectively act as adjectives qualifying \'bottle\' and \'key\', so they
are considered as less important to the match; in phrases like \'pair of
shoes\' or \'flight of stairs\' the library\'s assumption is less
obviously appropriate, so in such cases we\'d probably want to follow
\'shoes\' or \'stairs\' with \'\[n\]\' to force the library to treat it
as a noun). We said above that the library treats prepositions as a
special case. What that means is that a preposition must be entered into
an object\'s vocabulary for it to be matched by player\'s input, but
that the preposition won\'t match by itself. Thus, for example, an
object given a \`vocab\` property of \'piece of cake\' will indeed match
a command like EAT PIECE OF CAKE, but won\'t match EAT OF. There may
occasionally be other words we want treated like this, for example if
\'his\' or \'her\' or \'your\' or \'my\' figured in the name of an
object, we probably wouldn\'t want to match it on such a word alone. In
such a case we can mark the word as a weak token, either by following it
with \[weak\] or by enclosing it in parentheses; the two are equivalent:
tHerName: Topic \'her\[weak\] name\'; tHerName: Topic \'(her) name\'; We
haven\'t encountered Topics yet, so don\'t worry too much about what
they are just now; the examples nonetheless serve to illustrate the
principle that either way of defining this Topic would allow it to match
\'her name\' but not just \'her\'. We can use an analogous technique to
override the library\'s default assumptions about parts of speech by
following a word with \[n\] to make it a noun, \[adj\] to make it an
adjective, \[prep\] to make it a preposition, or \[pl\] to make it a
plural. For example, if we had a character called John Smith we might
define him thus: john: Thing \'John\[n\] Smith\'; tall; man; him\' ;
Likewise, if we used the first definition of our trousers object, but
wanted to allow the player to refer to it as a pair of trousers as well,
we\'d list \'of\' as an adjective but follow it by \[prep\]: trousers:
Thing \'blue trousers; old dark of\[prep\]; pants pair; them it\'
\"They\'re your old dark blue trousers. \" ; The John Smith example
brings us to another point. Normally, when the parser needs to construct
a sentence using the name you\'ve given it, it will add the appropriate
article, e.g. \"You are carrying a book and an apple\" or \"You can\'t
eat the book.\" In the case of something like John Smith that\'s clearly
inappropriate: we don\'t refer to him as \'a John Smith\' or \'the John
Smith\' (except perhaps when other people of the same name may be in
view), but normally just as \'John Smith\'. In other words, we don\'t
generally use an article with something that has a proper name. We could
deal with the John Smith example by explicitly defining \`proper =true
\`on the \`john\` object, but it turns out that we don\'t actually need
to. When all the words in a name start with a capital letter, adv3Lite
will assume it\'s a proper name without our having to say so explicitly.
In other cases we may occasionally need to tell the library what article
to use. For example, a mass noun like \'snow\' should be described as
\'some snow\' not \'a snow\', so we need to include the article \'some\'
explicitly at the start of the name: snow: Thing \'some snow; crisp
white\' ; This, incidentally, has the effect of setting the snow\'s
\`massNoun\` property to true, once again something we don\'t need to do
explicitly. Occasionally, we may come across a qualified noun, that is
one which doesn\'t strictly speaking have a proper name but still
shouldn\'t take an article. An example might be an object called
\"Jill\'s bag\"; the library won\'t treat this as a proper name since
not every word in the name starts with a capital letter, but we can make
it treat it as a qualified name by starting the name with (), thus:
jillBag: Thing \'() Jill\\\'s bag\'; Note, by the way, the use of the
backslash (\\) to \'escape\' the apostrophe (\') in \'Jill\\\'s bag\';
we escape the apostrophe that way to tell the compiler that this \'
isn\'t the closing quote-mark of the single-quoted string. We\'ve said
nothing so far about plurals. In the main we don\'t need to worry about
them, since the library can take care of them for us automatically.
Suppose, for example, we define two books thus: redBook: Thing \'red
book\' ; blueBook: Thing \'blue book\' ; The library will be quite
capable of working out that \'books\' is the plural of \'book\' (and it
can do this with a lot of irregular plurals too (such as \'men\' and
\'feet\'). So the game will understand perfectly well if the player
types TAKE BOOKS: \>TAKE BOOKS \>You take the red book and the blue
book. It can also create plurals for itself in text it outputs. For
example, suppose you were to define the following three objects in your
game: coin1: Thing \'gold coin\' \@hall ; coin2: Thing \'gold coin\'
\@hall ; coin3: Thing \'gold coin\' \@hall ; Then, when the player looks
around in the hall, the game will say \"You see three gold coins here.\"
In other words, without the game author having to do any more about it
the game recognizes that the three coins have identical names, so it
groups them together and describes them in the plural. In sum, then, the
\`vocab\` property provides a neat and efficient way of simultaneously
defining (or potentially defining) a number of different properties of
Thing, namely \`name\`, \`vocabWords\`, \`proper\`, \`massNoun\`,
\`qualified\`, \`plural\`, \`ambiguouslyPlural\`, \`isHim\`, \`isHer\`,
\`isIt\`. These in turn help to define several dependent properties such
as \`aName\` and \`theName\`, which give the name of the object preceded
by the appropriate form of the indefinite or definite article
respectively (or no article at all if the Thing is \`proper\` or
\`qualified\`). This may seem rather a lot to take in all at once, but
it quickly starts to become familiar once you start using it, and it\'s
worth becoming familiar with it, since mastering the proper use of the
\`vocab\` property can save you a lot of time and effort in the long
run. \## 3.2. Coding Excursus 3 \-- Methods and Functions In discussing
how to change the location of a Thing, we introduced a \*method\*. A
method is the other kind of thing you can define on an object besides a
property. While a property simply holds a piece of data, a method
contains code that\'s executed when the method is invoked (although, as
we shall see, we can generally use a method to provide a value wherever
TADS 3 expects a property). A method starts with an open brace \`{\` and
ends with a closing brace \`} A simple method might look something like
this: myObj: object name = \'nameless\' changeName(newName) { name =
newName; } ; The method has a single \*parameter\* called \`newName\`,
which we can use to pass a piece of data to the method. In general a
method can take as many parameters as we like (separated by commas), or
it can have none at all. The example above is about as simple as a
method can get; it simple assigns the value of \`newName\` to the name
property of \`myObj\`, so that if some other piece of code were to
execute the command: myObj.changeName(\'magic banana\'); Then the name
property of \`myObj\` would become \'magic banana\'. There\'s a few
further points to note about this example: - Every line of code we write
(something that\'s meant to be executed some time) must end with a
semi-colon. Note however that this applies only to lines of code in
methods and functions, \*not \*to property declarations and the like. -
To execute a method on a particular object we write the object name,
then a dot, then the method name (hence \`myObj.changeName(\'magic
banana\')\`). We\'d refer to an object property in the same way (e.g.
\`myObj.name\`). A method can also return a value to its caller, using
the \`return\` keyword. For example, we might define the (admittedly
trivial method): myObj: object double(x) { return 2 \* x; } ; Then if we
executed the statement: y = myObj.double(2); We\'d end up with y being
4. Sometimes we might want to define some code that we don\'t want
associated with any particular object. In such cases we can use a
\*function\* instead. To define double() as a function we could just do
this: double(x) { return 2 \* x; } Then we could just execute statements
like: y = double(x); We\'ll take a closer look at the kind of statements
we can put in methods and functions later. For now, if you want to know
more about methods and functions, you can read about them in the
Procedural Code chapter of the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. \## 3.3. Some
Other Kinds of Thing We have been introduced to the \`Thing\` class,
which we can use for basic portable objects, but as you\'ll find if you
experiment, there\'s not much you can do with them. You can pick them
up, carry them around, put them down again and throw them at other
things, and that\'s about it. We can gain a little more variety in what
Things can be do by overriding a few simple properties and/or using
using special kinds of \`Thing\` \-- subclasses of \`Thing\` \-- which
we can use for special purposes. Some of the main examples include: -
\`Wearable\` \-- clothing the player character can put on and take off.
Defining an object to be of class \`Wearable\` is the same as defining
it as a \`Thing\` and then defining \`isWearable = true\` on it. -
\`Food\` \-- something the player character can eat. Defining an object
of class \`Food \`is equivalent to defining it as a \`Thing\` and
defining \`isEdible = true\` on it. - \`Switch\` \-- something the
player can turn on and off. Defining an object to be of class Switch is
equivalent to defining a Thing with \`isSwitchable = true\`. -
\`Flashlight\` \-- a portable light source than can be turned on and off
(this is a special kind of \`Switch\` that becomes lit when on). We\'ll
be looking at light and darkness in more detail later on, but it\'s
helpful to know about this one to provide a means of looking around in
dark rooms. We can also extend the behaviour of a Thing by manipulating
some other basic properties. For example: - \`readDesc\` \-- if this is
defined (if used it should be defined as a double-quoted string)
\`readDesc\` provides the response to READ SOMETHING. - \`isHidden\` \--
if this is \`true\` then the object is hidden from view (even if it
would otherwise be in plain sight). - \`isLit\` - is this is true them
the object will act as a light source. These may become clearer with a
couple of examples. Suppose, for example, we have an object representing
a newspaper, and we want reading it to provide a different response from
merely examining it. We could define it like this: newspaper: Thing
\'newspaper; daily of\[prep\]; copy paper diatribe\' \@hall \"It\'s a
copy of the *Daily Diatribe*. \" readDesc = \"You find it contains the
usual collection of depressing articles detailing how the world is going
even further to thedogs than even the most determined pessimist hitherto
thoughtpossible. \" ; Note how we can use simple HTML mark-up like
\`*\...*\` to format the text (here putting \*Daily Diatribe\* in
italics). One use of \`isLit\` can be illustrated from a possible way of
defining the \`Flashlight\` class: class Flashlight: Switch isLit = isOn
; In fact, the library\'s definition of Flashlight is a bit more
complicated than that, using a number of features we haven\'t
encountered yet. It\'s a bit difficult to illustrate the use of isHidden
without using features of the language we haven\'t encountered yet, but
since they\'re about to come up in the next coding excursus, perhaps we
may anticipate them here. Suppose that when we examine a desk we find it
has a secret knob underneath that we hadn\'t noticed before. At a first
approximation we could do something like this: desk: Thing \'desk; plain
wooden\' \@study desc() { \"It\'s just a plain wooden desk. \";
if(knob.isHidden) { \"Closer examination, however, reveals that it has
asecret knob half-concealed on its underside. \"; knob.isHidden = nil; }
} ; knob: Thing \'secret knob\' \@desk isHidden = true ; Note how we can
define \`desc()\` as a method rather than just a double-quoted string,
but that if we do so we have to define it explicitly (with its name) and
not through the template. Note also that instead of writing
\`knob.isHidden =nil;\` we could have written \`knob.discover();\` this
would have enabled the definition of the desk to be written as: desk:
Thing \'desk; plain wooden\' \@study \"It\'s just a plain wooden desk.
\<\> Closer examination, however, reveals that is has a secret knob
half-concealed underneath. \<\> \<\> \" ; Although whether that should
be considered an improvement is perhaps a matter of taste, since many
people might find the first form clearer. There are in any cases
problems with either method, since there\'s nothing to stop the player
from picking up the desk and carrying it around, or indeed the knob. We
shall see how to prevent such things in the final section of the
chapter. In later chapters we\'ll see other ways to hide things.
Exercise 4: Try adding some \`Wearable\`, \`Food\` and \`Switchable\`
objects to your map. Also, add a \`Flashlight\` which can be used to
light up a dark room, and an object with a \`readDesc\`. Exercise 5: To
work effectively with TADS 3 you need to be able to look things up
easily in the \*Library Reference Manual\*. If you haven\'t got it open
already, open the \*LRM\* now in your web browser. Click the \*Classes\*
link near the top left hand corner, then scroll down the list of classes
in the bottom left-hand panel till you find \`Thing\`. Click on
\`Thing\` and take a quick look at its subclass tree; this is the
complete list of all the standard TADS 3 classes that derive from
\`Thing\`. Don\'t worry about trying to understand all of them just yet!
Instead just spend a bit of time looking further down the page at the
properties and methods of \`Thing\`, and then do the same with the other
classes we\'ve introduced so far. Don\'t worry if you can\'t take it all
in \-- you almost certainly won\'t be able to; the point is rather to
get an initial feel for what\'s there and for how to use the \*Library
Reference Manual\* to look up the information you need. \## 3.4. Coding
Excursus 4 \-- Assignments and Conditions In the previous Coding
Excursus we introduced methods and functions, which are the two places
procedural code can occur in TADS 3. One of the most common kinds of
procedural statement are assignment statements, that is statements that
assign a new value to a property or variable. We\'ve already met
properties. Assigning a new value to a property (i.e. changing its
existing value to something else within a method or function) is simply
a matter of writing the property name, followed by an equals sign (=),
followed by the new value we want to assign to the property, for
example: ring.bulk = 2; ring.name = \'gold ring\'; If this code were
executed in a method of the ring object, we wouldn\'t need to specify
that it was the ring object\'s properties we were referring to. In this
special case we could just write: bulk = 2; name = \'gold ring\';
Assignment statement can also perform calculations: ring.bulk =
ring.bulk + 2; ring.name = \'gold \' + ring.name; In the second example,
the \`+\` operator carries out string concatenation. If \`ring.name\`
previously held the value \'ring\' then executing the statement
\`ring.name = \'gold \' + ring.name\` will change \`ring.name\` to
\'gold ring\'. In the first example the + operator does what you\'d
expect; it adds 2 to the value of \`ring.bulk\`. We can also use the
other obvious arithmetic operators: - (subtract), \* (multiply), and /
(divide). For the complete list of operators available in TADS 3
assignment statements, see the section on \'Expressions and Operators\'
in the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. These include some neat short-cuts; for
example, \`ring.bulk = ring.bulk + 2\` can be written as \`ring.bulk +=
2\` As well as assigning values to properties, we can also assign them
to \*local variables\*. A local variable is simply a temporary storage
area for some piece of data. A variable can be local to a method or
function, or to some smaller block of code, where a block of code is any
sequence of statements between opening and closing braces: \`{}\`. A
local variable must be declared with the keyword \`local\` the first
time it\'s used, and the declaration can optionally be combined with an
assignment statement, for example: myObj: object myMethod(x, y) { local
foo; local bar = x + y; foo = bar \* 2; return foo; } ; In this method,
the parameters \`x\` and \`y\` also act much like local variables within
the method. They do not have to be declared with the \`local\` keyword,
since they\'ve already been declared as the method\'s parameters, but
like the local variables \`foo\` and \`bar\` they are meaningful only
within the context of the method. Method calls, function calls, and
assignment statements are probably the most common kinds of statement
making up the procedural code found in TADS 3 method and functions.
Often, both types of statement can occur at once, as in: foo = bar(x);
But there\'s another kind of statement that\'s almost just as important,
namely \*flow-control\* statements. Of these probably the most
significant is the \`if\` statement. In programming Interactive Fiction
(as in most other kinds of programming), it\'s seldom enough just to be
able to execute a set of statements in set sequence, we often need our
code to do different things depending on whether some condition is true
or false. The simplest form of an \`if\` statement in TADS 3 is:
if(condition) statement; For example, we might write: if(ring.weight \>
4) \"The ring feels strangely heavy. \"; Which means that if
\`ring.weight\` is greater than 4, the text \"The ring feels strangely
heavy.\" will be displayed. We can optionally add an else clause, which
defines what happens when the condition in the \`if\` part is not true,
for example: if(ring.weight \> 4) \"The ring feels strangely heavy. \";
else \"You pick up the ring with ease. \"; A further complication is
that we might want to execute more than one statement in the \`if\`-part
or the \`else\`-part. We can do that by enclosing a \*block\* of
statements in braces, thus: if(ring.weight \> 4) { \"The ring feels
strangely heavy, so heavy that it the attempt to lift it drains your
strength. \"; me.strength -= 3; } else { \"You pick up the ring with
ease. \"; ring.moveInto(me); } The conditions we can test for include -
\`a == b\` a is equal to b - \`a != b\` a is not equal to b - \`a \> b\`
a is greater than b - \`a \< b\` a is less than b - \`a \>= b\` a is
greater than or equal to b - \`a \<= b\` a is less than or equal to b -
\`a is in (x, y, z)\` a is equal to x or y or z - \`a not in (x, y, z)\`
a is neither x nor y nor z Note the distinction between \`a =b\`, which
assigns the value of \`b\` to \`a\`, and \`a == b\`, which tests for
equality between \`a\` and \`b\`. All these conditional expressions
evaluate to one of two values, \`true\` or \`nil\`. The \`nil\` value
also has other uses, in contexts where it means roughly \'nothing at
all\'. A value of \`nil\` or \`0\` (the number zero) is treated as
false, anything else is treated as true. It can be useful to combine
these logical conditions with \*Boolean\* operators. The three Boolean
operators available in TADS 3 are: - \`a && b\` a and b \-- true if both
a and b are true (i.e. neither nil nor 0) - \`a \|\| b\` a or b \-- true
if either a or b is true (i.e. neither nil nor 0) - \`!a\` not a \--
true if a is false (i.e. either nil or 0) Finally, it\'s often useful to
be able to assign one value to a variable or property if some condition
is true, and another if it\'s false, as in: if(obj.name == \'banana\')
colour = yellow; else colour = green; This is so common that there\'s a
special conditional operator we can use to write this sort of thing much
more succinctly: colour = obj.name == \'banana\' ? yellow : black; More
generally, this takes the form: someValue = condition ?
valueIfConditionTrue : valueIfConditionFalse; In the special case where
we want to ensure that we assign a non-nil value to something, we can
use the if-nil operator \`??\`. For example, suppose we have: someValue
= a ?? b; This will assign the value \*b\* to \`someValue\` if \*a\* is
nil, but will otherwise assign \*a\* to \`someValue\`. Together
assignment statements, method and function calls, and conditional
statement make up the great bulk of procedural statement we\'re likely
to use in TADS 3 programming. There are others, some of which we\'ll
meet later. In the meantime, if you want to get the full picture, read
the section on \'Procedural Code\' in the \*TADS 3 System Manual\*. \##
3.5. Fixtures and Fittings Objects of class \`Thing\` are portable: they
can be picked up, carried around the game map, and dropped elsewhere.
This is also true of the various subclasses of \`Thing \`we met above.
But many objects in a work of Interactive Fiction aren\'t portable,
they\'re part of the fixtures (doors, windows, trees, houses, mountains
etc.) or they\'re too big and heavy to pick up (large tables, sofas, and
other actors, for example). To stop things being portable, we can define
\`isFixed = true\` on them. Alternatively, we can define them using one
of the classes we\'re about to meet below. Either way the effect on such
objects will be: - They can\'t be picked up. - They are not listed in
room descriptions (unless they have a \`specialDesc\` or
\`initSpecialDesc\` property defined). Note that we \*can\* define
\`specialDesc\` and/or \`initSpecialDesc\` on ordinary portable objects
too; the \`initSpecialDesc\` will be displayed until the object has
moved, and the \`specialDesc\` used thereafter (actually the full story
is slightly more complex than that, since we can change the
\`useInitSpecialDesc\` condition). For example, we might define: + ring:
Wearable \'diamond ring\' initSpecialDesc = \"A diamond ring lies
discarded on the ground.\"; This would result in the ring being given a
separate paragraph in the room description, and listed as \"A diamond
ring lies discarded on the ground\" until it\'s moved. The real point
here, however, is that a non-portable object won\'t be mentioned in a
room listing at all (because it\'s assumed that it will have been
mentioned in the room description) unless it\'s given a \`specialDesc\`
or \`initSpecialDesc\`. For example: + table: Heavy \'large wooden
table\' specialDesc = \"A large wooden table occupies the middle of
theroom. \" ; Since this table will (probably) never be moved, it
doesn\'t make any difference whether we use \`specialDesc\` or
\`initSpecialDesc\` in this latter instance. The various classes we can
use to define non-portable objects are as follows: - \`Fixture\` \-- An
object that\'s obviously fixed in place, like a house or a shelf nailed
to the wall. - \`Heavy\` \-- An object that gives being too heavy as the
reason why it can\'t be moved; this is useful for large pieces of
furniture and the like. - \`Decoration\` \-- an object that\'s
unimportant but mentioned in the description of something else, so we
want to provide a description of it. If the player attempts to do
anything with a Decoration apart from examining it, it will display
it\'s \`notImportantMsg\`, which is typically \'The whatever is not
important. \' - \`Distant\` \-- an object representing something that\'s
beyond the player\'s reach, generally because it\'s a long way off, like
the moon or a distant range of hills. An attempt to do anything but
examine a Distant object will result in a refusal of the form \'The moon
is too far away. \'; this message can be change by overriding the
\`notImportantMsg\` property. - \`Immovable\` \-- an object that can\'t
in fact be picked up even though this isn\'t immediately obvious to the
player, for example an item that\'s heavier than it looks. The
distinction between this and a \`Fixture\` is a subtle one: what it
boils down to is that the parser will be readier to choose X in response
to a TAKE X command if X is an \`Immovable\` than if it\'s a
\`Fixture\`. - \`Unthing\` \-- an object used to represent the
\*absence\* of something. This will respond to any command with its
\`notHereMsg\`, typically something like \'The gold ring isn\\\'t here.
\'. This might be used, for example, to remind the player that the gold
ring has just fallen through a grating. If an \`Unthing\` and something
other than an \`Unthing\` both match the player\'s command, the parser
will always ignore the \`Unthing\`. If the player tries to take any of
these kinds of object, or indeed to put them somewhere else or move
them, the default response will tend to be a rather bland \"The whatever
is fixed in place\" (or the equivalent appropriate to the class in
question). We can customize these responses by overriding one or more of
the following properties: - \`cannotTakeMsg \-- \`a message (typically
given as a single-quoted string, e.g. \'You can\'t take that\') shown in
response to an attempt to take the object in question. -
\`cannotMoveMsg\` \-- a message (again typically a single-quoted string)
shown in response to attempts to move the object in question. By default
we just use the \`cannotTakeMsg\` (so any changes to the
\`cannotTakeMsg\` will be copied to the \`cannotMoveMsg\`). -
\`cannotPutMsg\` \-- a message (again typically a singe-quoted string)
shown in response to put the object in question in, on, under or behind
something. Again, by default, we just use the \`cannotTakeMsg\`. The way
these might be used (on either an Immovable or a Fixture) is illustrated
by the following example: cabinet: Immovable \'large wooden cabinet;
bulky polished of\[prep\]; furniture piece\' \"It\'s a large piece of
furniture, made of polished wood. \" cannotTakeMsg = \'The cabinet is
far too bulky for you to carryaround. \' cannotMoveMsg = \'It is too
heavy to move. \' cannotPutMsg = \'You cannot put the cabinet anywhere
else; it istoo bulky. \' ; Note that because all these objects are
ultimately subclasses of Thing, we can (and usually will) use the
\`Thing\` template with them. So, for example, our previous desk with
secret knob example could become: desk: Heavy \'desk; plain wooden\'
\@study \"It\'s just a plain wooden desk. \<\> Closer examination,
however, reveals that is has a secret knob half-concealedunderneath.
\<\> \<\> \" ; knob: Fixture \'secret knob\' \@desk isHidden = true
cannotTakeMsg = \'The knob is firmly attached to the desk. \' ;
\`Unthing\`, however, has a special template of its own, since it\'s
generally more useful to define its \`notHereMsg\` property: ring:
Unthing \'gold ring\' \'The gold ring is no longer here; you dropped it
down thegrating. \' ; In this example \'gold ring\' is the \`vocab\`
property as before, but \'The gold ring is no longer here; you dropped
it down the grating. \' defines the \`notHereMsg\` property (which will
be used in response to any command targeted at the ring). Finally, you
should have noticed that we\'ve been defining some properties as
single-quoted strings and others as double-quoted strings. The
distinction is important and will explained more fully in the next
chapter, but for now it is important to remember not to mix the two up,
otherwise things won\'t work properly. As a rough rule of thumb
properties with names ending in \`desc\` need to be defined as
double-quoted strings, while those with names ending in \`msg\` need to
be defined as single-quoted strings. Exercise 6: Look up the \`Fixture\`
class in the \*Library Reference Manual\* and take a quick look at what
classes it inherits from and the list of classes that inherit from it.
Don\'t worry about anything you don\'t understand yet, and don\'t
imagine that you have to commit all this information to memory; the
point of the exercise is just to get a feel for what\'s there and to
start learning where to find it when you need it. Exercise 7: Go back to
the practice map you created before (or create a new one) and add some
examples of each of the various kinds of non-portable object described
above. \[« Go to previous
chapter\](2-map-making\--rooms.html)    \[Return to table of
contents\](LearningT3Lite.html)    \[Go to next chapter
»\](4-doors-and-connectors.html)
