Welcome to the TADS Player Kit

# Welcome to the TADS Player Kit

Thanks for installing the TADS Player Kit! This kit has everything you
need to play games written with TADS. It works with games created using
TADS 2 and TADS 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How to start a game

To run a TADS game, go to the Windows Start menu, click on **TADS**, and
then click on **HTML TADS Interpreter**.

When the Interpreter window appears, you can click on the **Browse for
Games** button, or use the menus to select **File** \| **Open**.

Now just select the .gam or .t3 file for the game you want to play.

(To play a TADS game you find on the Internet, simply download it onto
your computer's hard disk first, then select the downloaded file as we
just described.)

## Where to find TADS games

[IFDB](http://ifdb.tads.org/), the Interactive Fiction Database, has
listings for thousands of Interactive Fiction titles, with descriptions,
user reviews, recommendations, and download links. You can find most
TADS games that have ever been released, along with games for other IF
authoring systems.

The central distribution hub for IF is the [IF
Archive](http://www.ifarchive.org/). The Archive has the Internet's most
extensive public collection of material related to Interactive Fiction,
including games, books, articles, and programming systems. TADS games
are collected in the directory
[if-archive/games/tads/](http://www.ifarchive.org/indexes/if-archiveXgamesXtads.html).

## Learn more about TADS

For TADS news, information, manuals, and downloads, visit the official
TADS Web site, [www.tads.org](http://www.tads.org).

The TADS site also has links to the Interactive Fiction community and
other IF resources, such as discussion forums, blogs, and other IF
authoring systems.

## Write your own game

If you'd like to write your own Interactive Fiction, you can find the
full TADS Author's Kit on [tads.org](http://www.tads.org). The Author's
Kit is free and has everything you need to create original IF with TADS.

## Problems?

If you run into any problems with TADS, check the [system compatibility
notes](../compat.htm). There are a few known problems with certain
Windows configurations, and the notes explain how to fix these. You
should read the compatibility notes in particular if:

- HTML TADS is crashing;
- you're using Wine;
- you're using a non-English version of Windows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright Â©1999, 2012 by Michael J. Roberts.
