![](topbar.jpg)

[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| Introduction  
[*Next:* Fundamentals](fund.htm)    

# Introduction

Welcome to the TADS 3 Technical Manual!

This book is a collection of technical articles about different aspects
of TADS 3. The topics here overlap somewhat with *Getting Started in
TADS 3*, the *System Manual*, and the *Library Reference Manual*, but
our thrust here a bit different: here, we try to provide practical "how
to" information, like a tutorial, but at the same time to explore the
details in depth, like reference material. Hopefully, the result is the
best of both worlds rather than the opposite.

The articles here are mostly self-contained, each covering a single
topic in depth, so you can approach this material in any order you like.
If you're just learning TADS 3, though, we recommend reading *Getting
Started in TADS 3* first - the articles in the Technical Manual assume a
degree of familiarity with the system, and the *Getting Started* guide
should help greatly with that.

We've organized the material here into three sections. "Fundamentals"
covers the core topics that most people using TADS 3 will encounter in
everyday use. "TADS 3 In Depth" includes material that authors will find
useful as they tackle particular game-development challenges; read these
articles as you encounter the relevant areas in your design work.
"Advanced Topics" will be especially useful to authors who want to
really customize the system, and should be interesting to anyone who
wants to know exactly how things work inside the library.

Many of the articles here have been previously published. Some appeared
in the Technical Articles section on [tads.org](http://www.tads.org),
and some were adapted from earlier documentation (particularly the *TADS
2 Author's Manual*). We've gathered them here in an effort to offer
"one-stop shopping" for TADS 3 documentation.

Several of the articles herein were generously contributed by TADS
users. Many thanks to Steve Breslin, Eric Eve, Michel Nizette, and
Andreas Sewe for taking the time to share their expertise and for
allowing me to include their work in this collection.

One of the reasons for this manual's rather ad hoc organization is that
it's designed to be a living, growing collection. I plan to continue
adding new material over time, especially in-depth "how to" articles.
I'm interested in hearing your ideas for new topics that should be
covered. And if you've struggled to overcome missing documentation to
figure out for yourself how some part of the system works, I'd be
especially grateful if you'd consider contributing an article on the
subject for a future edition. To facilitate user participation, I've set
up a page on tads.org with a "wish list" of new articles for future
editions: <http://www.tads.org/t3techlist.htm>.

—

*MJR*

*Palo Alto, California*

*September, 2006*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*TADS 3 Technical Manual*  
[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| Introduction  
[*Next:* Fundamentals](fund.htm)    
