![](topbar.jpg)

[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| [The Core Library](core.htm) \> Doors  
[*Prev:*Room Descriptions](roomdesc.htm)     [*Next:* TravelConnectors
and Barriers](travel.htm)    

# Doors

A Door is an object that can be attached to the direction property of a
Room, and which can be open and closed and optionally locked and
unlocked, and which has to be open to allow an actor to pass through it.
As in the adv3 library, so also in adv3Lite a physical door is
represented by two game objects, each representing one side of the door
(in each of the two locations connected by the door). To create a door,
then, it is necessary to define a Door object in each location attached
to the appropriate direction property; to let the library know that
these are two sides of the same door it is further necessary to set the
**otherSide** property of each Door object to point to the other Door
object, for example:

    hall: Room 'Hall' 'hall'
       "The front door lies to the west. "
       west = frontDoor
    ;

    + frontDoor: Door 'front door; solid oak' 
        "It's a solid oak front door, strong enough to resist a siege. "
        
        otherSide = frontDoorOutside
        lockability = lockableWithKey
        isLocked = true    
    ;


    drive: Room 'Front Drive' 'front drive'
        "The front drive sweeps round from the northwest and comes to an end just in
        front of the house, which stands directly to the east. A narrow path runs
        round the side of the house to the southeast. "
        
        east = frontDoorOutside
    ;

    + frontDoorOutside: Door 'front door'    
        otherSide = frontDoor
        lockability = lockableWithKey
        isLocked = true
    ;

Note that as in the above example, to make a door lockable we define its
lockability property just as we would on any other Thing.

Another point to note is that in order to keep everything in sync we
defined the **otherSide** property on both sides of the Door and
isLocked = true on both sides of the Door. While this is good practice,
it is not absolutely necessary, however, since if we forget to do it the
library will attempt to correct it for us. In particular, if we are
compiling for debugging, the library will warn us at the start of the
game if it finds any Doors with an otherSide of nil, and whether or not
we're compiling for debugging it will attempt to correct mismatched
otherSide and isLocked properties (with isLocked = true taking
precedence over isLocked = nil). Note, however, that there is no need
for the lockability properties of both sides of the same door to be the
same. It is quite in order for each side of a door to have a different
locking mechanism (e.g. a key on one side and a keypad on the other) or
for only one side of the door to be lockable (and hence unlockable). IF
you *deliberately* don't want a door to have another side (for example,
because it's a fake door that's never opened, or it's one side of a lift
door whose other side may change in the course of the game) you can
suppress the warning messages by setting its otherSide property to self
instead of nil. In that case the exit leading through the door will be
shown in the exit lister as visited, which may or may not be what you
want; on the one hand it can betray the fact that the door doesn't go
anywhere, while on the other by so doing it may helpfully tell players
that they don't need to try to find a way through the door since it can
never be opened. You may thus also want to override the **destination**
property of such a door to **unknownDest\_**, which will make it show up
in the exit listing as an unvisited exit. You could then subsequently
change the destination to getOutermostRoom (which will make it show up
as a visited exit) once something happens to tell the player that
there's in fact no way through the door.

The library takes care of a few other details for us besides, in
particular:

- A Door is defined as being fixed in place and not listed (isFixed =
  true and isListed = nil) by default, since these settings apply to
  virtually all Doors.
- A Door is defined as being visible in the dark (i.e. visibleInDark
  becomes true) if the room on its other side is illuminated (this
  allows the player character to travel from a dark room to an
  illuminated room through a Door, so is usually the desired behaviour).
- The **makeOpen(stat)** and **makeLocked(stat)** of a Door
  automatically keep both sides of a door synchronized (i.e. calling
  these methods on one side of a Door automatically updates the
  appropriate property — isOpen or isLocked — on both sides of the
  Door).
- When the player character passes through a door the isDestinationKnown
  property is set to true on both sides of the door (mainly to allow
  subsequent pathfinding through the door).
- If an actor tries to pass through a door that is closed, the game will
  attempt to open the door via an implicit action and will block the
  travel if the door remains closed because it was locked, unless the
  door's **autoUnlock** property is true, in which case attempting to
  open the door will trigger an attempt to unlock it via an implicit
  action provided the attempt has a plausible chance of success (either
  because the door doesn't need a key or because the actor possesses a
  key that might plausibly unlock the door).

Finally, note that to define the front door in the example above we had
to define two objects, frontDoor and frontDoorOutside, each representing
one side of the door. This is nearly always the case when using the Door
class (unless you're using it to define a dummy door that can never be
opened). For doors that are the same both sides you may find it easier
to use the [SymDoor](../../extensions/docs/symconn.htm#symdoor) class
defined in the [symconn](../../extensions/docs/symconn.htm) extension,
since this allows you to define a door using only one game object
instead of two. To take advantage of this class you would need to
explicitly include the symconn extension in your build.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*adv3Lite Library Manual*  
[Table of Contents](toc.htm) \| [The Core Library](core.htm) \> Doors  
[*Prev:* Room Descriptions](roomdesc.htm)     [*Next:* TravelConnectors
and Barriers](travel.htm)    
