::: topbar
[![](topbar.jpg){border="0"}](index.html)
:::

::: main
[\[Main\]](index.html)\
*[\[Previous\]](furtherprogramming.htm)
  [\[Next\]](averysimplegame.htm)*

# Chapter 2 - A Sample Game

In the next chapter we\'ll start developing a game that will occupy us
for the remainder of this *Guide* (apart from the odd explanatory
digression or two). But before we embark on *The Further Adventures of
Heidi* we\'ll start with a very simple two-room game (the goldskull
example familiar to TADS 2 users) that provides an overview of how a
TADS 3 program fits together. When you are reading later sections, which
go into more detail, it may be helpful to have an idea of where the
details fit into the general structure of a game. This chapter should
help provide that overview (but readers with some experience of other
TADS-like languages who find the going a bit too slow might like to skip
this chapter and go straight to the next).

The basic requirements for starting out are the TADS 3 Author\'s Kit and
a text editor. If you are using TADS 3 Workbench for version 3.0.13 or
later you can use its built-in editor (probably the best option both
because it has been specially adapted for working with TADS 3 code and
because its integration with Workbench makes it especially convenient to
use); otherwise if all else fails you can use Notepad (or I suppose a
really determined UNIX user could use vi), but you may like to consider
downloading one of the many free programming editors available on the
internet. Information about programming editors that can be used for
writing Interactive Fiction may be found at
[http://www.firthworks.com/roger/editors/index.html](http://www.firthworks.com/roger/editors/index.html){target="_top"}.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Getting Started in TADS 3*\
[\[Main\]](index.html)\
*[\[Previous\]](furtherprogramming.htm)
  [\[Next\]](averysimplegame.htm)*
:::
