[![](topbar.jpg)](index.html)

[\[Main\]](index.html)  
*  [\[Next\]](generalintroduction.htm)*

# Preface

The first edition of *Getting Started in TADS 3* was an attempt by one
(then fairly novice) TADS 3 user to help others with some experience of
programming IF systems to get up to speed on TADS 3. Since then, it has
grown and developed as a result both of feedback from people who have
used it, and of its author’s attempts to improve it. In its present form
it is intended to be used as one possible starting point for anyone
wishing to learn to write Interactive Fiction using TADS 3. Another
possible starting point would be *Learning TADS 3*, which takes a rather
different approach.

This guide has never been intended as a complete manual covering every
aspect of the language and library; it is instead intended to introduce
new users to the basics of the system. If you are new to TADS 3, the
best way for you to get to grips with it is probably for you to work
through this guide and gain a reasonably secure understanding of its
contents before moving on to the other documentation that covers the
language and library in more depth.

Once you are reasonably comfortable with what *Getting Started* has to
teach, however, you will need to move on to other documentation (and
practice using the system) to start gaining mastery. The *TADS 3 Tour
Guide* provides a much more thorough overview of the TADS 3 library, and
can be used as a second tutorial to follow this one, or you may prefer
to follow the more systematic introduction provided by *Learning TADS
3*. The *System Manual* describes the TADS 3 language in far more depth
than is possible here, and you will find yourself needing to consult it
frequently (reading through it at some stage might be no bad idea too,
though there'll be parts you'll probably want to skip till you need
them), while the *TADS 3 Library Reference Manual* provides a complete
reference to the library. Finally, the *Technical Manual* covers a
number of issues not dealt with in this guide, and goes into far more
detail on some that are.

It remains only to say three things: first to record my appreciation for
the enormous amount of effort that Mike Roberts has put into the
development of TADS 3, and for his comments and suggestions on earlier
drafts of this guide; second to record my thanks for his permission to
incorporate parts of his own work into this guide; and finally to thank
all those readers of previous versions of this guide for their feedback
and suggestions, which will hopefully enhance its usefulness for those
that follow.

[TABLE]

|     |     |
|-----|-----|
|     |     |

*Eric Eve  
Harris Manchester College  
Oxford  
May 2012  
*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Getting Started in TADS 3*  
[\[Main\]](index.html)  
*  [\[Next\]](generalintroduction.htm)*
